ੈᎫ૥߻୴ݢ
Learning Chinese
JULIAN  K. WHEATLEYA FOUNDATION  COURSE  IN MANDARIN
YALE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS  NEW  HAVEN  & LONDON
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityLearning Chinese comes with an extensive set of audio clips that serve as 
a personal guide to the Chinese language material in the book. These, as well as vocabulary lists (both Chinese-to-English and English-to-Chinese), keys to exercises, and other special features, can be found at the com-panion website yalebooks.com/wheatley.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityੈᎫ૥߻୴ݢ
PREFACE
xvA. Ten basic features of Learning Chinese
 1. Provides instruction in spoken and written Mandarin; no prior background 
assumed.
 2. Serves as a comprehensive resource for the foundation levels of Chinese 
language study. Learning Chinese (ﬁ  rst year) and the forthcoming compan-
ion volume (second year) cover approximately 200 class hours.
 3. Includes sample schedules for all 200 hours of class study. 4. Presents rich content (based on the author’s own experience learning 
Chinese) that is presented incrementally and in detail, is carefully sequenced, and builds toward dialogues or narratives that recapitulate important content.
 5. Includes a variety of exercises and audio materials for self-study. The com-
panion website, yalebooks.com/wheatley, provides a full set of audio clips, as well as comprehensive vocabulary lists, exercise keys, and other features.
 6. Contains content that is easily transformed into class activities, and easily 
supplemented by online or other materials.
 7. Includes conversational lessons and character lessons that can be used 
separately or together.
 8. Includes conversational and character lessons that are related but not iden-
tical to each other, and which can be interleaved.
 9. Teaches reading with both the traditional (Taiwan) and simpliﬁ  ed (Main-
land) character sets.
 10. Teaches characters inductively, by emphasizing reading in context as much 
as possible.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale Universityxvi PREFACE
ĖੈᎫ૥߻୴ݢėǖလৈᓍገᄂ࢛
ጙĂ! ৙ഃ໦࢛ኧညాᎫਜ਼ၗෂᎫኧᇴࡼੈᎫྜྷඡ୴ݢă
औĂ! ᑚဵጙᄁᔏ੝ቶࡼ૥߻୴ݢăৢೝݿǈ࢒ጙݿဵ߱଀ၺຳǈ࢒औݿဵ
ᒦ଀ၺຳǈࡍᏖኊገኀࣗ200ৈలဟă
ྯĂ! ۾୴ݢএᎌ200ৈలဟࡼల߈஠ܭࣞဣಿă႐Ă! ᔫᑗো௣ᔈ଄ࡼੈᎫኧᇴள಼ǈறቦܠ๝જᄌǈ݀ጲክኔ୍஠ࡼऱါ
ᓆݛఎᐱǈඛలᔢઁથܠ๝೫ጙ࣪ࣤજ૞ኒၤጲᒮሚকలࡼᒮገજᄌăดྏߠဣǈࠨށॊීă
ᇋĂ! ᆐᔈኧᑗᄋ৙ࣶዹછࡼၗෂ೗ᇴૺഺፒᓾ೯)୅yalebooks.com/
wheatley)ă
ങĂ! ୴ݢดྏጵᓞધ߅లჭ૚ࣅǈጐܣ᎖ᄰਭᆀ൥૞໚Ⴧᅆ஼஠ቲߠݗă໕Ă! ્જ୴ݢᎧੈᔊ୴ݢభጲॊఎဧ፿ǈጐభጲሤઑ๼੝ဧ፿ăڭĂ! ્જ୴ݢᎧੈᔊ୴ݢดྏሤਈǈݙࡣઑሤጞ౷ǈᔈ߅ᄏᇹăோĂ! ੈᔊ୴ݢጲथ଼ੈᔊܠቖăလĂ! ဤᔊ୴ኧݧ፿ਙฃजǈᅀਭ঱ᒮሚൈࡼຠᐺǈဧኧᇴᑗถ৫ᏴᑞဣᎫ
ஹᒦᔈ཭ኧᇴă
B. Ten general principles for using Learning Chinese
 1. Prepare before class, perform in class, and consolidate after class.
 2. Move from simple to complex, from familiar to novel, and from rote to 
realistic.
 3. Focus on typical interchanges, personalize them when possible, and com-
pound them into longer conversations.
 4. Recognize that Mandarin usage varies as much as English. Regard Learning 
Chinese as a guide, but accept additional input from teachers and your own observations.
 5. Learn functional phrases rather than individual words; visualize interac-
tions and match appropriate language; and act out scenarios from cues.
 6. Distinguish character recognition from reading, and focus reading activi-
ties on comprehension.
 7. Write characters to improve recognition ability, but utilize word processing 
programs to compose texts.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityPREFACE  xvii
 8. Consolidate conversational skills while studying the character units; con-
solidate character skills while studying the conversational units.
 9. As much as possible, learn language in context rather than from lists. (But 
be mindful that lists can help with recall and review.)
 10. Know the core, test the core (i.e., that practiced in class). For character 
material, test comprehension.
ဧ፿ĖੈᎫ૥߻୴ݢėࡼလৈ૥۾Ꮗᐌ
ጙĂ! ༓ࢯల༄Ꮎᇴǈలᒦ೗ᇴጲૺలઁআᇴă
औĂ! ଼࠭ࡵ࡝আᏭǈ࠭෪ညࡵၚᇨǈ࠭૦቗ݷ೗ࡵᔈ཭ୣଔăྯĂ! ሌၚ଑࢜ቯࡼ્જǈᏳሶৈቶછዓ࿼ǈᔢઁ౫ᐱᆐᅲᑳࡼ્જă႐Ă! ੈᎫࡉܭᄴ፞ᎫጙዹআᏭܤࣶǈኧညభ୓۾୴ݢᔫᆐ፿जᒎฉဧ፿ǈ
ݙஞ።কᄧན಑နࡼ୐ፇǈᔈ଄ጐ።༮᎖਋ފă
ᇋĂ! Ꭷ໚ᒑኧᇴৈܰညࠤǈݙྙኧᇴྙੜဧ፿ࠤᔝǈஐᓐᄋာǈෛผဣଔ
ୣഗ༽ஹǈዝ೗Ꭷᒄሤປ๼ࡉܭࡼऱါă
ങĂ! ॊ༹ဤᔊਜ਼ᏞݙࡼࣗᄴǈᏞࣗ૚ࣅᔢੑጲಯஊᆐᓍă໕Ă! ᄰਭၗቖੈᔊ౶ᄋ঱ܦཱྀᔊተࡼถೆǈᄴဟஐᓐສፒၒྜྷྟୈ౶ቖ
ᔫă
ڭĂ! ኧᇴੈᔊဟǈᄴဟଝ༓્જถೆǗኧᇴ્જဟǈᄴဟଝ༓ੈᔊถೆǈ
ઑሤ࠳஠ă
ோĂ! Ꭷ໚ಽ፿ညᔊܭĂညܭࠤኧᇴǈݙྙಽ፿ᎌ࿟ሆᆪࡼలᆪኧᇴă)ညᔊ
ܭĂညܭࠤభ፿౶ૄፂᎧআᇴă*
လĂ! ᐾᆻਖ਼ቦ୴ݢǈހ၂ਖ਼ቦ୴ݢăჅᆣਖ਼ቦ୴ݢᒎࡼဵలჭ୴ኧᒦჅဧ
፿ࡼ୴ݢǈᒗ᎖ੈᔊ୴ݢᐌᓍገ፿౶ހ၂ಯஊถೆă
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityੈᎫ૥߻୴ݢ
INTRODUCTION
xxiGoals and methods
The language
This is a course in Standard Chinese, a language that is often colloquially referred to as Mandarin. The origins of this language and its position in the Chinese-speaking world will be discussed below, in the section on linguistic background.
Variation
Given the geographic spread of Mandarin across the Chinese-speaking world, and its function as a lingua franca co-existing with regional and local languages, it is not surprising that it demonstrates a broad range of variation in pronun-ciation, word choice, grammar, and usage. Some speakers, by virtue of geo-graphic origin or educational background, may claim to be arbiters of ‘good’ and ‘bad’ Mandarin, particularly in matters of pronunciation, where the edu-cated speech of Beijing is generally considered to be standard. However, when it comes to the pronunciation of individual words, word choice, particular nuances of meaning, grammatical organization of sentences, or linguistic usage, Chinese displays a range of variation comparable to, or perhaps greater than, that of English, and such variation is only likely to grow as contact with foreigners increases and the Chinese language spreads beyond the borders of China.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale Universityxxii INTRODUCTION
Learning Chinese recognizes a standard sound system for Mandarin (as rep-
resented in the pinyin system of romanization) but otherwise accepts a broad 
range of usage, much of it conditioned by social or geographic factors. Where particular usage can be labeled (as, for example, ‘Taiwan’ or ‘southern China’), it is. There may also be unlabeled linguistic material in Learning Chinese that is judged aberrant by teachers or other native speakers of the language. Such judgments should be noted, but they too may need to be revised as you continue to observe the language in its full richness, as it is actually spoken or written.
The audience
Though students who already have some ability in Chinese will, in many cases, ﬁ nd this course useful, it does not assume any prior background in the lan-
guage. Learning Chinese is intended for a diverse audience, specialist and non-specialist alike, who need a course that not only guides them toward basic conversational and literary skills but also stimulates their curiosity about the linguistic setting of the language and the geography, history, and culture of the lands where it is spoken. Learning Chinese is intended to provide a solid foun-dation for further study of the language, whether in a specialized program of Chinese studies or in conjunction with work or further study in a Chinese-speaking environment.
A foundation
When you begin studying a language, a lot of time has to be spent familiarizing yourself with the ‘code’: the sounds, words, and organization of the language. There comes a point, after a year or two of (non-intensive) study, when you have acquired a critical mass of language material and, provided you remain observant and responsive to feedback, can start to learn effectively from direct interaction with native speakers. This is also the point at which the notion of immersion begins to make sense, and when going abroad to study the language in a completely immersive setting offers the maximum beneﬁ  t. This textbook is designed to get you to that point. With the additional materials recommended within, it covers approximately 200 class hours—a year and a half to two years in a regular course of study.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityINTRODUCTION  xxiii
Self-instruction
With help from a Chinese speaker, particularly in the early stages of language development, Learning Chinese can also serve as a manual for self-instruction. 
It introduces the language systematically; it has extensive explanations about usage, as well as suggestions about how to learn the material within; it provides a pathway for the inductive learning of both conversational and literary skills; and it comes with a selection of audio ﬁ  les and other materials that can be 
accessed electronically.
Goals summarized
Succinctly, the goals of Learning Chinese are: (a) a basic conversational compe-tence, which means mastery of pronunciation and familiarity with a repertoire of useful conversational situations, including some, involving language and cultural issues, that allow you as a learner to explore topics of interest; (b) an understanding of the reading process and the properties of the character writing system so that you can begin to develop a reading competence by way of edited texts written in either the simpliﬁ  ed or the traditional character set; (c) the ability to represent speech with the pinyin system of transcription, to write a selection of characters from one of the standard character sets, and to use refer-ence materials, word processing, or other forms of electronic communication to continue to independently build language competence; and (d) a basic famil-iarity with those aspects of modern Chinese society and culture that speciﬁ  cally 
relate to language use.
Reaching the goals
You study a foreign language in order to learn how to converse with people of another culture, to read material written in the language of that culture, to be able to write the language down, to prepare spoken presentations, and, if you are very ambitious, to write letters, reports, or other forms of composition in that language. How should you proceed effectively to reach those goals? What should the focus of study be? The following is a brief attempt, in anticipation of a complete course of study, to answer these questions.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale Universityxxiv INTRODUCTION
A. CONVERSATIONAL  SKILLS  When learning a foreign language, the conversa-
tional skills of listening and speaking are primary; the literary skills of reading 
and writing are secondary. In effect, conversational skills can be taught inde-pendently of reading and writing, but the latter are most effectively taught with reference to spoken language.
For the oral skills of speaking and listening, the objective—learning how to 
interact in context—is clear. If a colleague pokes his head in my ofﬁ  ce to ask, 
Nĭmen yŏu săn ma? (literally: ‘You-all have umbrella question’), I can interpret his request not as an inquiry about possessions—‘Do you own an umbrella?’—but as a request to borrow an umbrella—‘Can you lend me an umbrella?’—because I know it’s raining and he’s going to meet his wife. So I respond, without much thought: Yo ˇ u, yo ˇu, yào yòng ma? ‘Sure, you want to use it?’ 
Almost before the words are out of my mouth, I realize—for various reasons that involve the likelihood of his making such a request—that it is more likely he’s asking if I need to borrow his umbrella: ‘Do you need an umbrella?’ Indeed, this is the case, for he then clariﬁ  es: Bù, bù, wo ˇ pà nı ˇmen méiyo ˇ u ‘No, 
I was afraid you [all] didn’t have one.’
This example underscores the importance of situational context. Ultimately, 
it was context that led me to an interpretation of the speaker’s intentions. It was also context that allowed me to ﬁ  gure out that ‘You-all have umbrella ques-tion’ meant ‘Do you need an umbrella?’ For the learner, the situational context is clearest during personal interactions; in other words, in conversation. Learn-ing Chinese focuses on conversation from the start, with you, the learner, as a participant as much as possible. Conversation also involves instant feedback and a degree of overlapping content, so that listening skills support speaking and vice versa.
In Learning Chinese, content is organized into units of a dozen or more topics, 
each of which takes several weeks to complete. You will proceed as if on a guided tour, being introduced to relevant material, practicing short interac-tions, proceeding in overlapping waves, and culminating in one or more exten-sive dialogues that knit the various parts of the unit into a cohesive whole. This approach makes it possible to introduce a wealth of interconnected material that can form the basis of engaging conversations and interesting narratives. 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityINTRODUCTION  xxv
For example, Unit 4 presents (among other things) time phrases, names and 
titles, introductions, and subjects of study. These can be practiced piecemeal during introductory classes; later, they are woven into a dialogue involving a Chinese businessman striking up a conversation with an overseas student (such as yourself) on a bus in Sichuan province. Within each lesson, topics are selected so you can build up a conversational repertoire that can be personal-ized, practiced, and extended from lesson to lesson.
B. READING  AND CHARACTERS  During conversation, you are trying to apprehend 
the intentions of the speaker; so, too, in reading, you are trying to interpret the intentions of the author, who had to imagine an audience and transform the language into written code. In English, the written code is based on letters and various grammatical conventions; in Chinese, it is based on characters and a different set of grammatical conventions.
For the literate, reading Chinese feels like a seamless process of extracting 
meaning from text: characters evoke words (or parts of words) and words evoke images that blend into meanings. However, when you are learning to read a language like Chinese, the reading process tends to resolve itself into two phases: recognizing the characters (which is actually a process of matching ‘single-syllable’ characters to what are often polysyllabic words) and then reading for comprehension. Because learning to recognize characters is so difﬁ  cult, the problems of comprehension (over and above basic recognition of characters) sometimes receive less attention than they deserve.
The character units in Learning Chinese are intended to address both issues. 
To ease the burden of learning to recognize characters, the texts are composed of words and grammatical patterns that are familiar from the core units; the texts are also composed so that new characters appear with enough frequency, and in a sufﬁ  cient range of contexts, to make it possible to retain and recall them through the process of reading alone. In addition, to ensure that reading proceeds smoothly from character recognition to comprehension, most of the readings are embedded in question-and-answer or comment-and-response formats that provide clear contexts for understanding.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale Universityxxvi INTRODUCTION
The goal of the reading instruction in Learning Chinese is to foster an under-
standing of the reading process and develop basic reading skills in students 
with little or no prior experience in Chinese so that they may make the transi-tion to graded reading materials already in print, beginning with such well-tested classics as The Lady in the Painting and Strange Tales in a Chinese Studio 
(both published by Yale University Press).
C. COMPOSITION  Of the four essential language skills—listening, speaking, 
reading, and writing–the last (better called ‘composition’) is the most elusive, and after years of schooling, even native speakers often ﬁ  nd written expression difﬁ cult. The problem stems from the lack of the sort of feedback that guides 
face-to-face interaction; not just linguistic features like stress and intonation, but facial expressions, gestural movements, and the physical context of the interaction, all of which help to monitor the communicative event. However, because writing persists, the good writer learns to tailor it to an imagined audi-ence, providing more redundancy in the form of complete sentences, precise usage, and elaboration. This careful tailoring often depends on language intu-ition that only native speakers possess, and even the most ﬂ  uent speakers of a learned language usually depend on native speakers to verify the accuracy of written work.
While learning to write well enough to serve even basic needs of written 
communication is a skill best left to higher levels of language learning, when conversational and reading skills are more advanced, composition can serve a useful purpose even at foundation levels. Because it is a productive skill, like speaking, composition can help with vocabulary growth, usage, grammar, and cohesion. In later units, Learning Chinese occasionally makes use of ‘guided compositions’, in which an outline of the content is given and the task is to incorporate it into a written text. Teachers may wish to add other written assign-ments, in the form of diary entries, biographical sketches, or personal letters (such as the one that appears in Unit 7).
Romanization versus characters
Even though written Chinese is generally a style of its own, rather different from spoken language, it is obviously possible to write out conversations and 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityINTRODUCTION  xxvii
other spoken material using characters. Dramatic plays and the dialogue sec-
tions of novels and language textbooks are among the genres that record spoken language in this way. However, as you know, while the Chinese script is an efﬁ  cient and aesthetically pleasing writing system for native speakers of the language, it has disadvantages for learners who need a way of representing pronunciation and keeping track of language material during the learning process. Learning Chinese separates the study of the language in general from 
the study of characters in particular. Conversational material is presented in the standard, phonetically based notation of the Chinese-speaking world, called Hanyu Pinyin, ‘spelling the sounds of Chinese’. Utilizing Hanyu Pinyin for the core units ensures that the learning of spoken material is not conditioned by factors related to character acquisition; in effect, it means that dialogues and other spoken material can be more natural and extensive than would be pos-sible if all the characters that represent them had to be learned at the same time.
Because Learning Chinese separates character reading (and writing) from 
other aspects of language learning, students who wish to study or review the spoken language without reference to characters can ignore, or postpone, the character units, while those with sufﬁ  cient vocabulary and grammatical knowl-edge can alternatively study the character material alone.
Writing of characters
While learning to write, or reproduce characters, does help with recognition (and so, ultimately, with reading), it is not the case that you need to be able to write all characters from memory in order to be able to read them. A hint or two—the ‘heart’ sign in one character, a ‘phonetic’ element in another—will often be enough for the expectations arising from context to be conﬁ  rmed. In 
recognition of this, the character material in Learning Chinese is organized primarily to develop reading skills. Information on how to write the graphs is included to draw attention to the general structure of characters, as well as to facilitate their reproduction. It is certainly useful to learn to write from memory a few hundred of the more common characters in order to absorb the general principles of character construction. It is also useful to be able to write personal information in characters so that you can sign in and sign out, ﬁ  ll out forms, 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale Universityxxviii INTRODUCTION
and jot down your contact information. Otherwise, like most Chinese them-
selves nowadays, the bulk of your writing will make use of Chinese language word processing, which involves selecting from a set of character options—in other words, character recognition, not production. Thus, Learning Chinese takes the position that learning to write characters from memory is not a primary goal at foundation levels.
The simpliﬁ  ed and traditional character sets
Without the requirement that characters be written from memory, the exis-tence of two sets of Chinese characters (the simpliﬁ  ed set used on the Mainland and in Singapore, and the traditional set associated with Taiwan and many overseas communities) becomes much less problematical. Both sets can be introduced simultaneously. Students note the relationship between the two forms, learn to read both in context (though Learning Chinese places more emphasis on the simpliﬁ  ed set), and select one to write. We recommend fol-
lowing the Mainland majority and learning to write the simpliﬁ  ed set, which is generally based on well-established written variants. Individuals are free to choose, but should be aware that while formal examinations tend to offer ver-sions of both, Mainland study programs expect their students to be able to read simpliﬁ  ed characters.
From textbook to classroomThe selection and ordering of topics in Learning Chinese is based on my own experience learning and teaching Chinese over several decades. It is guided by what the beginning student is likely to encounter in and out of the classroom setting, as well as by the need to provide a broad foundation of grammatical, lexical, and cultural information for future work in Chinese. It mixes practical topics, such as providing biographical information, buying train tickets, or giving toasts, with topics of general interest, such as geography, regional lan-guages (‘dialects’), and brand names. Such topics are easily enriched with online materials such as satellite maps, photographs, video clips, and advertise-ments. They are also easy to transform into effective classroom activities.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityINTRODUCTION  xxix
The language learner as explorer
It is my belief that, given the enormity of the task of learning a new language (which I sometimes liken to repairing a car while driving it, or renovating your house while still living in it), it is helpful to be as interested in the new language as it is to be fascinated by the new culture—of which language is a part. Unfor-tunately, writing about language tends to be dry and unnecessarily technical. Until now, there has been no ‘Indiana Jones’ for linguists. In Learning Chinese, 
we have not only made the language the focus of some conversations and nar-ratives, but we have also frequently gone out of the way to comment on the history, structure, and delightful quirks that are scattered across the linguistic terrain. In my own experience, one of the main topics of conversation with Chinese friends all over the world has been the language itself, whether it be regional accents, local usage, or the Chinese equivalent of ‘splat’. (Which is, incidentally, biā, a sound for which, ofﬁ  cially at least, there is no character.) 
The other two common subjects of conversation are weather and, as you might expect, food; therefore, these two topics are also given some prominence in Learning Chinese.
Learning Chinese is exuberant rather than restrained. Its Chinese content is 
current and lively, with subjects that range from ordering food to bargaining, from religion to the Chinese school system. It is also larded with quotations, rhymes, popular culture, linguistic information, and historical and geographi-cal notes. It is intended to be an intellectually stimulating resource for both students and teachers alike.
Basic geography
Names for China
The immediate source of the name ‘China’ is thought to be a Persian word
1, 
which appeared in European languages during the 16th or 17th century as a name for porcelain, that was then applied to the country from which the ﬁ  nest 
examples of that material came. If this is correct, then ‘China’ derives from ‘china’, not the other way around.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale Universityxxx INTRODUCTION
Another name, Cathay, now rather poetic in English but surviving as the 
regular name for the country in languages such as Russian (‘Kitai’), as well as 
in the name of the Hong Kong–based airline Cathay Paciﬁ  c, is said to derive from the name of the Khitan (or Qitan) Tartars, who formed the Liao dynasty in the north of China during the 10th century. The Liao dynasty was the ﬁ  rst 
to make a capital in the region of modern Beijing.
The Chinese now call their country Zhōngguó, often translated as ‘Middle 
Kingdom’. Originally, this name meant the central, or royal, state of the many that occupied the region prior to the Qin uniﬁ  cation in 221 
BCE. Other names 
were used before Zhōngguó became current. One of the earliest was Huá (or Huáxià, combining Huá with the name of the earliest dynasty, the Xià). Huá, 
combined with the Zhōng of Zhōngguó, appears in the modern ofﬁ  cial name of 
the country—as the following entries show.
The People’s Republic of China (PRC)—Zhōnghuá Rénmín Gònghéguó
The PRC is the political entity proclaimed by Mao Zedong when he gave the inaugural speech (‘China has risen again’) at the Gate of Heavenly Peace (Tiān’ānmén) in Beijing on October 1, 1949. The PRC also claims sovereignty over Taiwan and all other regions currently controlled by the government in Taipei.
The Republic of China (ROC)—Zhōnghuá Mínguó
The ROC was the name of the political entity established in 1912, after the fall of the Manchu Qing dynasty, which took place the previous year. The man most responsible for the founding of the Republic was Sun Yat-sen (Sūn Yìxiān in Mandarin), and for this, he has earned the epithet ‘Father of the Country’. Although he was named provisional president in 1911, fears for the unity of the country led to the appointment of Yuan Shih-k’ai (Yuán Shìka ˇ i), 
an important military and diplomatic ofﬁ  cial under the Qing, as the ﬁ  rst presi-
dent of the Republic in 1912. In 1949, the president of the Republic, Chiang Kai-shek (Jia ˇ ng Jièshí), ﬂ  ed with the government to Taiwan and maintained the 
name Republic of China as part of his claim to be the only legitimate govern-ment of the whole of China. De facto control, however, has been limited to the 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityINTRODUCTION  xxxi
island of Taiwan, clusters of islands in the Taiwan Straits, the ‘offshore islands’ 
of Quemoy (Jīnmén) and Matsu (Ma ˇ zu ˇ ) close to the mainland, and some minor 
islands in the South China Sea and to the east of Taiwan. In recent years, even in formal contexts (such as on recent postage stamps), ‘Taiwan’ sometimes takes the place of ‘Republic of China’ as a name for the political entity.
Taiwan–Táiwān
Taiwan is some 210 kilometers off the coast of eastern China’s Fujian province; its central mountains are just visible from the Fujian coast on a clear day. The Dutch colonized the island in the early 17th century, ﬁ  ghting off the Spanish, who had also established bases on the northern part of the island. The Dutch called the island Formosa, from the name Ilha Formosa ‘beautiful island’, given to it earlier by the Portuguese (who did not actually colonize it).
Taiwan’s earliest inhabitants spoke Austronesian languages unrelated to 
Chinese, and indigenous groups such as the Ami, Paiwan, and Bunan (who still speak non-Chinese languages) are descendents of those early Taiwan Austronesians. By the 13th century, Chinese speaking Hakka and Fukienese—regional Chinese languages—had established small communities on the island. These were joined by refugees from the Ming after the fall of that dynasty on the mainland. The Qing dynasty annexed Taiwan in 1683, making it a province. In 1895, Taiwan, along with nearby islands such as the Pescadores group (Pénghú Lièda ˇo), was ceded to Japan as part of the settlement of the Sino-Jap-
anese war. It remained a Japanese colony until 1945, when it was returned to the Republic of China.
Under the Nationalist government, Mandarin (Guóyu ˇ ) was made the ofﬁ  cial 
language of the country, while Taiwanese (Táiyu ˇ ), a form of Southern Min 
spoken by the majority of its population, was suppressed. In recent years, however, Taiwanese has undergone a resurgence in public life.
Hong Kong—Xiāng Ga ˇ ng
Hong Kong lies within the Cantonese-speaking region of southern China. The 
English name derives from the Cantonese pronunciation of the place, ‘Heung Gong’, which means ‘fragrant harbor’ (Xiāng Ga ˇ ng in Mandarin). Hong Kong 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale Universityxxxii INTRODUCTION
was formally ceded to the British in the Treaty of Nanking (Nánjīng), which 
was signed at the end of the Opium War in 1842 on a ship anchored in the Yangtze River, slightly to the east of Nanjing. The Kowloon Peninsula (Jiu ˇ lóng ‘nine dragons’) was added in 1860 after the Second Opium War, and the New Territories (Xīnjiè), which includes islands and mainland territory, were leased to the British in 1898 for 99 years, making Hong Kong total slightly more than 1,000 square kilometers.
In 1984, well before the expiration of the New Territories lease, Prime Min-
ister Margaret Thatcher and Chairman Deng Xiaoping formulated the Sino-British Joint Declaration, an agreement for the return of Hong Kong to Chinese sovereignty. In 1990, the principle of ‘One Country, Two Systems’ [Yī Guó, Lia ˇng Zhì] was formulated: Hong Kong would retain its laws and a high degree 
of political autonomy for 50 years. At midnight on July 1, 1997, Hong Kong became a Special Administrative Region [Tèbié Xíngzhèngqū] of China, which guaranteed it autonomy within the PRC in all but foreign affairs and defense.
Historically, Hong Kong has been settled by a number of distinct Chinese 
groups. These include the Bendi (‘locals’), who emigrated during the Song dynasty (10th–13th century) after being driven from their homes in north China; the Tanka, ﬁ  sherfolk who lived on boats and are thought by some to be the descendents of the non-Han Yue people; the Hokla, early immigrants from Fujian; the Hakka, who ended up mostly in less fertile parts of the New Ter-ritories; and numerous clans and people from nearby Cantonese-speaking regions, as well as other parts of China. Despite its small size, Hong Kong has more successfully preserved the traces of many traditional Chinese social forms and practices than have many other parts of the Chinese-speaking world.
Macau—Àomén
Sixty kilometers to the west of Hong Kong, across the Pearl River estuary, is Àomén, known in English as Macau. The Chinese and English names have different sources. Àomén, means, literally, ‘gate to the inlet’; but the Portuguese name, ‘Macao’ (English Macau), is said to derive from the name of a revered local temple, called ‘Maagok’ in Cantonese (Māgé), dedicated to Matsu, a goddess worshipped by ﬁ  shermen and sailors
2.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityINTRODUCTION  xxxiii
The peninsula of Macau was settled by the Portuguese in 1557, and was 
administered by them for over 400 years, though the question of who held 
sovereignty was not resolved3 until 1999, when it reverted completely to Chinese 
territory. The two small islands of Coloane and Taipa were added to the terri-tory in the middle of the 19th century, and later connected to the Macau pen-insula by bridges. Recently, the islands have been joined by landﬁ  ll, and the central portion has become the site of the Cotai Strip, envisioned as an Asian version of the Las Vegas strip—only larger. Macau is the only place in China where gambling is legal.
Chinese lands; Chinese overseas
Informally, the two Chinese political entities are often referred to as Mainland China (Zhōngguó Dàlù)—or simply ‘the Mainland’—and Taiwan, rather than the PRC and the ROC. The occasional need to talk about a single Chinese entity, consisting of the Chinese mainland plus Hong Kong and Taiwan, has recently given rise to a term, Lia ˇ ng’àn Sāndì (‘two-shores three-lands’).
Chinese who live outside the Lia ˇ ng’àn Sāndì can be classiﬁ  ed as Huáqiáo, 
generally translated as ‘Overseas Chinese’. In its broadest sense, Huáqiáo can apply simply to ethnic Chinese living outside the Lia ˇ ng’àn Sāndì, regardless of 
how assimilated they are to local cultures. More typically, however, it has a narrower application, referring to Chinese who retain features of Chinese culture in their adopted homelands and who keep ties with the motherland. There is another term, Huáyì (‘Chinese-hem [of a robe]; frontier’) that is applied to ethnic Chinese born overseas, e.g., Me ˇ iguó Huáyì ‘Chinese Americans’, etc.
Nationalists and CommunistsAfter the establishment of the PRC in 1949, it was customary to distinguish the two political entities by their only extant political parties, the Communist Party (Gòngcha ˇ nda ˇ ng), abbreviated CCP, and the Nationalist Party ( Guómínda ˇ ng, 
or Kuomintang), the KMT. Hence, ‘the Communist government’, ‘the Nation-alist leaders’, etc. Recent changes in Taiwan and on the Mainland make neither term appropriate. In 2000, the Nationalists lost to Chen Shui-bian and the Democratic Progressive Party, though they returned to power in 2008 with the 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale Universityxxxiv INTRODUCTION
election of the KMT candidate, Ma Ying-jeou (Mă Y īngjiŭ in Mandarin). Mean-
while, on the Mainland, the Communist Party, though retaining its institu-
tional position in the government, has become less of a dominating force in political life.
QINGHAIQINGHAI
SHAANXISHAANXISHANXISHANXIHEBEIHEBEILIAONINGLIAONINGJILINJILINHEILONGJIANGHEILONGJIANG
YUNNANYUNNANGUIZHOUGUIZHOUHUNANHUNANXINJIANG UYGUR A.R.XINJIANG UYGUR A.R.INNER MONGOLIAINNER MONGOLIA
A.R.A.R.
HUBEIHUBEININGXIANINGXIA
HUIHUI
A.R.A.R.
TIBET A.R.TIBET A.R.
GUANGXIGUANGXI
HAINANHAINANGUANGDONGGUANGDONGJIANGXIJIANGXI
FUJIANFUJIANZHEJIANGZHEJIANGSHANGHAISHANGHAI
SICHUANSICHUANHENANHENANSHANDONGSHANDONG
ANHUIANHUIJIANGSUJIANGSUGANSUGANSUÜrümqiÜrümqi
XiningXining
LhasaLhasa
ChengduChengduLanzhouLanzhouYinchuanYinchuan
TaiyuanTaiyuanShijiazhuangShijiazhuangHohhotHohhotChangchunChangchunHarbinHarbin
ShenyangShenyang
TianjinTianjinBeijingBeijing
JinanJinan
ZhengzhouZhengzhouXiXi’anan
WuhanWuhanNanjingNanjingHefeiHefei
ShanghaiShanghai
HangzhouHangzhou
FuzhouFuzhouChangshaChangsha NanchangNanchangChongqingChongqing
GuiyangGuiyang
KunmingKunming
NanningNanningGuangzhouGuangzhou
Hong KongHong Kong
HaikouHaikouMacauMacauQINGHAI
SHAANXISHANXIHEBEILIAONINGJILINHEILONGJIANG
YUNNANGUIZHOUHUNANXINJIANG UYGUR A.R.INNER MONGOLIA
A.R.
HUBEININGXIA
HUI
A.R.
TIBET A.R.
GUANGXI
HAINANGUANGDONGJIANGXI
FUJIANZHEJIANGSHANGHAI
SICHUANHENANSHANDONG
ANHUIJIANGSUGANSUÜrümqi
Xining
Lhasa
ChengduLanzhouYinchuan
TaiyuanShijiazhuangHohhotChangchunHarbin
Shenyang
TianjinBeijing
Jinan
ZhengzhouXi’an
WuhanNanjingHefei
Shanghai
Hangzhou
FuzhouChangsha NanchangChongqing
Guiyang
Kunming
NanningGuangzhou
Hong Kong
HaikouMacauProvince
Autonomous RegionMunicipalitySpecial Administrative Region
claimed by India, administered by PRC
claimed by PRC, administered by Indiaclaimed by PRC, administered by the Republic of Chinaclaimed by PRC, administered by Japan
Most of the areaof the Indian stateof Arunachal Pradeshis claimed by China.
The Pratas Islands are administered bythe Republic of China and claimed bythe People’s Republic of China.Taiwan and a few islands offthe coast of Fujian areadministered by the Republicof China and claimed by thePeople’s Republic of China.The Diaoyu Islands/Senkaku Shoto are administeredby Japan, but claimed by thePeople’s Republic of China andthe Republic of China.Aksai Chinis claimedby India
N0
0 800 km500 mi
CHONGQINGCHONGQINGCHONGQING
Liaˇng’àn Sāndì
Peking, Beijing, and Peiping
One of the curious consequences of the political differences between the PRC and the ROC is that they have different names for the city formerly known to the English-speaking world as Peking. For the PRC, the capital is Be ˇ ijīng ‘north-
ern capital’, the city that has been the capital for all but brief periods since 1422, when Emperor Yong Le of the Ming dynasty moved the government north from Nánjīng ‘southern capital’. However, in 1927, the Nationalists under Chiang Kai-shek, having little real power in the north and under threat from the Japanese, made Nanjing their capital and restored the name Be ˇipíng (Peiping) 
(‘northern-peace’) that the northern city possessed before becoming capital in 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityINTRODUCTION  xxxv
the 15th century. Ofﬁ  cially, the Nationalists retained the name Be ˇ ipíng even 
after the Japanese conquered the city of Nanjing, and continued to do so after Beijing reverted to the capital in 1949 under the PRC.
The spelling ‘Peking’ is probably a reﬂ  ection of the Cantonese pronunciation 
of the name Beijing, in which the initial of the second syllable is pronounced with a hard ‘k’ sound. Representations of Cantonese pronunciation were often adopted by the British as ofﬁ  cial postal spellings (cf. Nanking for Nánjīng and 
Chungking for Chóngqìng). Though most foreigners now spell the name of the city, in Mandarin pinyin transcription, as Beijing, the old spelling and pronun-ciation survive to this day in certain proper names, such as Peking University (still the ofﬁ  cial English name of the institution) and Peking duck. The tran-
scription, Beijing, is not without its problems either, since speakers who do not know the pinyin system tend to make the ‘j’ sound more foreign or exotic by giving it a French quality: [bay-zhing]. As you will soon learn, the actual standard pronunciation is closer to [bay-džing].
Linguistic backgroundChinese
One of the consequences of the long duration of Chinese history is that the term ‘Chinese’ has come to have a wide range of applications. It can refer to the earliest records, written on oracle bones, and dated to the second millen-nium 
BCE. It can refer to the languages in the Sinitic branch—the ‘Sino’ of the 
Sino-Tibetan family—which includes not only the standard language but regional languages (‘dialects’) such as Cantonese and Hokkien. (In this sense, Chinese is to the modern Chinese languages as Romance is to the modern Latin languages French, Spanish, Italian, and so on.) Finally, in its most narrow sense, it can refer to the modern standard language, often called Mandarin by English speakers.
Mandarin and Chinese
When the Portuguese began to have extensive contact with China in the late 16th and early 17th centuries, they adapted the word ‘mandarin’ (itself adapted 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale Universityxxxvi INTRODUCTION
to Portuguese from Indian and other sources) to refer to Chinese ofﬁ  cials; 
hence modern meanings such as ‘powerful ofﬁ  cial; member of a powerful 
group’. They also used it for the language spoken by such ofﬁ  cials, called 
Guānhuà in Chinese, ‘the speech of ofﬁ  cials’. Guānhuà was the name given to 
specialized speaking practices, based on northern Chinese, which served as a lingua franca among ofﬁ  cials and members of other educated classes who might come from different parts of China and speak mutually unintelligible Chinese in their home regions.
Guānhuà can be regarded as the precursor of the modern standard language. 
In English, the name ‘Mandarin’ has survived the transformation from special-ized language to the modern standard, but the name Guānhuà has not. The Chinese term only survives in the specialized terminology of linguists, who use the term Be ˇ ifāng Guānhuà Tı ˇ xì ‘northern Guanhua system [of dialects]’ to refer 
to the northern dialect grouping that includes Mandarin and other distinct dialects now spoken over a vast stretch of territory in the north, west, and southwest of China. Western linguists often refer to this grouping as the Mandarin dialects, using ‘Mandarin’ in a generic sense. The Mandarin dialects stand in contrast to other dialect groupings, such as the Cantonese or Fujianese.
Strange as it may seem, the Chinese-speaking world has no single term for 
modern standard Chinese, or Mandarin. In the PRC, it is ofﬁ  cially called 
Pu ˇ tōnghuà (‘the common language’), a term with a legacy dating back to the early part of the 20th
 century; in Taiwan, it is called Guóyu ˇ  (‘the 
national language’), a term dating to at least 1918; while in Singapore, it is called Huáyu ˇ  (‘the language of the Huá’)—Huá being an ancient name for the 
Chinese people. In ordinary speech, other terms are often used: Hànyu ˇ  (‘lan-
guage of the Han’), for example, or Zhōngwén (‘Chinese-language’).
Mainlanders tend to ﬁ  nd it strange that English speakers refer to the stan-
dard language as Mandarin. Norman (1988: 136) recommends using the term Standard Chinese or, when possible, just Chinese, and keeping Mandarin for the dialect grouping. In certain contexts, Chinese will sufﬁ  ce, but at times it will be ambiguous, for it does not rule out Cantonese, Shanghainese, and other so-called ‘dialects’. The longer term, Standard Chinese, is awkward, and assumes 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityINTRODUCTION  xxxvii
that there is only one standard, which makes it difﬁ  cult to talk about differences 
in, say, Taiwan and Mainland Mandarin. So, in Learning Chinese, if the simple term ‘Chinese’ is not sufﬁ  cient, we fall back on the venerable term ‘Mandarin’, 
taking heart from the usage of such eminent Chinese as Yuen Ren Chao, who wrote a much-loved textbook called Mandarin Primer (1948), and more recently, Singapore’s Lee Kwan Yew, who wrote a volume describing his own study called Keeping My Mandarin Alive (2005).
The origins of spoken MandarinHistorically, a majority of the Chinese population spoke regional or local lan-guages and was illiterate. For them, there was no general medium of commu-nication across regional lines. For the educated, Guānhuà served in a limited way as a spoken medium, while Classical Chinese, the language of administra-tion, education, and high culture (see below), served as a written medium. By the 19th century, it was clear that the lack of a spoken norm that could serve the communicative needs of all classes across the country was a major obstacle to the modernization of China, and eventually efforts were made to identify a suitable medium and promote it as the standard. Guānhuà was an obvious candidate. However, by the 19th century, it had become strongly associated with the educated speech of Beijing, putting southerners at a disadvantage. Classical Chinese, though it had no regional bias, was a highly stylized written language with ancient roots that made it an unsuitable basis for a national spoken medium.
After various interesting, but completely impractical, attempts to establish a 
hybrid language to balance regional differences (particularly between north and south) the Chinese language planners settled on a northern strategy: promoting the pronunciation of the educated speech of the capital, Beijing, but incorporat-ing material from a broad range of other sources as the basis of usage. Thus, words with wide distribution were adopted over northern or Beijing localisms, for example. The spoken standard also absorbed material from written sources that introduced words and phrasing from the important economic and cultural region of the Lower Yangtze Valley (Shàngha ˇ i to Nánjīng) as well as words for 
modern concepts ﬁ  rst coined in Japanese.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale Universityxxxviii INTRODUCTION
Norms and variation
Though both Taiwan and the PRC have always agreed on the educated Beijing standard for pronunciation, geographical distance, political separation, and cultural divergence have resulted in the emergence of two norms for spoken usage, as a comparison of dictionaries from Taiwan and the PRC will demon-strate. These differences, though still moderate in scope, extend from the pro-nunciation of particular words to grammar and usage.
Even within the emerging norms of Standard Chinese (Mainland and Taiwan 
versions), enormous variety exists at the local level. The case of Taiwan is illus-trative. There, Guóyu ˇ  (Mandarin) is not the ﬁ  rst language of much of the popu-
lation. The most common ﬁ  rst language is Táiyu ˇ  (Taiwanese), a Southern Min 
language that is very similar to the Southern Min spoken in the province of Fujian across the Taiwan Straits. (Until the success of the ‘Speak Mandarin’ movement, Southern Min was also the language of most Singapore Chinese; elsewhere in Southeast Asia, it remains an important language in Chinese communities.)
With so many in Taiwan speaking Táiyu ˇ  as a ﬁ  rst language, it is not surpris-
ing that the Mandarin spoken there is often inﬂ  uenced by the pronunciation, 
grammar, and usage of Taiwanese. The result is a unique Taiwanese Mandarin. The same phenomenon occurs elsewhere, of course, so that no matter where you are in China, Mandarin heard on the street will generally have local fea-tures. Native speakers quickly get used to these differences, just as English speakers get used to regional accents of English. Learners will typically ﬁ  nd the 
variation disruptive, and they will need time and experience to adjust to it.
Though there are probably more and more Chinese who speak some variety 
of Mandarin as their ﬁ  rst language, and whose speech is close to the appointed norms, it is still true that the majority of Chinese speak more than one variety of Chinese, and for many of them the standard speech represented in this textbook would be a second language. A few years ago, USA Today published statistics on the ‘world’s most common languages, ranked by population that uses each as a ﬁ  rst language’. Mandarin was listed ﬁ  rst, with 885 million speak-
ers (followed by Spanish with 332 million and English with 322 million). The ﬁ gure for Mandarin does not include those who speak Cantonese or one of the 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityINTRODUCTION  xxxix
other regional languages, but it must include a large number of speakers whose 
Chinese would be difﬁ  cult to understand by someone familiar only with the Beijing standard.
When describing the best Chinese language, Chinese speakers tend to focus 
on pronunciation, praising it as biāozhu ˇ n ‘standard’. For this reason, native Chinese speakers, who tend to be effusive in their praise in any case, will some-times ﬂ  atter a foreigner by saying he or she speaks the language better than 
they do. By ‘better’, they mean with a better approximation to the standard, educated accent. Apart from language classrooms, the most biāozhu ˇ n Mandarin 
is heard on the broadcast media, in schools, and in the speech of young, educated urban Chinese.
Regional languages and minority languages
There are seven major dialect groupings of Chinese, including the geographi-cally extensive Mandarin group (divided into southwestern, northwestern, and northern regions) mentioned earlier. Of the others, Cantonese (Yuè), Shang-hainese (Wú), Fukienese or Hokkien (Mı ˇ n), and Hakka (Kèjiā) are the best known. (Yuè, Wú, and Mı ˇ n are Chinese linguistic designations, while Hokkien 
and Hakka are the regional pronunciations of the names Fújiàn and Kèjiā, respectively.) All represent groupings of diverse dialects thought to share a common origin. Even within each group, the varieties are not necessarily mutu-ally intelligible. Cantonese, for example, includes dialects such as Hoisan (Táishān) which are quite distinct from the standard dialect.
In many respects, the dialect groupings of Chinese—represented by Canton-
ese, Shanghainese, Hakka, etc.—are different languages. They are not, after all, mutually intelligible, and they have their own standard speeches (Guang-zhou for Cantonese, Suzhou for Shanghainese, etc.). In linguistic terms, they are often said to be comparable to Dutch and German or Spanish and Portu-guese. However, unlike those European languages, the Chinese ‘dialects’ share a written language and identify with a common culture. Recently, the term ‘topolect’, a direct translation with Greek roots of the Chinese term fāngyán (‘place-language’), has gained currency as a more formal term for what are generally called ‘regional languages’ in this book. So we may speak of Canton-
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale Universityxl INTRODUCTION
ese as the standard language within the Cantonese (or Yuè) grouping, and 
varieties such as Hoisan (Táishān) as dialects within Cantonese.
Regional languages should be distinguished from the languages of the non-
Chinese (non-Han) ethnic groups—such as the Mongolians, Tibetans, or Uighurs—that make up about 8–9 percent of the total population of China. There are 56 ofﬁ  cially recognized ethnic minorities in China, almost all of them with their own languages or language groups.
A Bái couple in their ﬁ  nery, Dàlıˇ, 
Yúnnán (photograph by Jordan Gilliland)
Standard Written ChineseStandard Written Chinese (or written Mandarin) is the language of composi-tion, learned in school and used by all educated Chinese regardless of the particular variety or regional language that they speak. A Cantonese, for example, speaking Taishan Cantonese at home and in the neighborhood, speaking some-thing closer to standard Cantonese when he or she goes to Guangzhou, and 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityINTRODUCTION  xli
speaking Cantonese-ﬂ  avored Mandarin in certain formal or ofﬁ  cial situations, 
is taught to write a language that is different in terms of vocabulary, grammar, 
and usage from both Taishan and standard Cantonese. Even though he or she would read it aloud with Cantonese pronunciation, it would in fact be more easily relatable to Mandarin in lexicon, grammar, and in all respects other than pronunciation.
From Classical Chinese to modern written Chinese
Written language always differs from spoken, for it serves quite different func-tions. In the case of Chinese, the difference was, until the early part of the 20th century, extreme. Until then, most written communication, and almost all printed matter, was written in a language called Wényán ‘literary language’, and generally known in English as Classical Chinese. As noted earlier, it was this language that served as a medium of written communication for the liter-ate classes, much as Latin served as a medium for communication among educated classes in medieval Europe.
Classical Chinese was unlikely ever to have been a close representation of a 
spoken language. It is thought to have had its roots in the language spoken some 2,500 years ago in northern China. That language, though still Chinese in the sense that it is ancestral to modern Chinese languages, would have dif-fered quite signiﬁ  cantly in sound, grammar, and vocabulary from any form of modern Chinese. Though Classical Chinese can be regarded as a different language from the modern, it was written in characters that have retained their basic shape to the present day, and these serve to preserve the connection between ancient and modern words whose pronunciation and grammatical context is radically different. While spelling differences (that reﬂ  ect changes in pronunciation), as well a high degree of word replacement, make Old English texts almost completely opaque to modern readers, ancient Chinese texts con-tinue to look familiar to Chinese readers despite the changes that have taken place in the intervening years. Educated Chinese can read them aloud in modern standard pronunciation, say, or in Cantonese or Hokkien. Without knowledge of the grammar and vocabulary of Classical Chinese, they may not fully understand them, but enough words—and, indeed, sayings and phrases—
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale Universityxlii INTRODUCTION
have survived to modern times to make the writings of Confucius (6th–5th 
century BCE) or the poems of Li Po (8th century CE) superﬁ  cially accessible to 
the modern reader of Chinese.
Classical Chinese is still used for certain kinds of formal or ritual writing, 
much as Latin is used for diplomas and certain kinds of inscriptions in Western countries. It has also served as a source of words, quotations, allusions, and even style for the modern language, both written and spoken, but relatively few people read the classical language well, and only a few specialists are still able to write it ﬂ  uently.
Since Classical Chinese was not based on an accessible spoken language, 
facility in composition required memorizing large samples to act as models. Once learned, the classical language would tend to channel expression in con-servative directions. Citation was the main form of argument; balance and euphony were crucial elements of style. These features did not endear it to the modernizers, and they sought to replace it with a language closer to the modern spoken version. They had a precedent, for all through Chinese history there had in fact been genres of writing known as Báihuà (‘white—plain or vernacular—language’) that were rich in colloquial elements. Such genres were not highly regarded or considered worthy of being literary models, but they were well known as the medium of the popular Ming and Qing novels, such as Dream of the Red Chamber (also called the The Story of Stone), Journey to the 
West (also known as Monkey King), or the Romance of the Three Kingdoms. 
Though it retained classical elements, Báihuà provided the early model for a more colloquial standard written language.
Because norms within the newly emerging written language varied, and led 
to problems of consistency and clarity, some advocated a return to Classical Chinese as the written standard. If it could have shed some of its stylistic affec-tations (such as the high value put on elaborate or archaic diction), Classical Chinese might have developed into a modern written norm much as Classical Arabic has become the written norm of the Arabic-speaking world. Classical Chinese, however, was too closely associated with conservatism and insularity at a time when China was looking to modernize. Nevertheless, a new written norm does not arise overnight, and for at least the ﬁ  rst half of the 20th century, 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityINTRODUCTION  xliii
a number of different styles across the range of classical to colloquial coexisted 
and vied for dominance. Following the revolution of 1949, written styles in Taiwan and the PRC diverged. In the PRC, political and other factors favored a more colloquial written style, whereas in Taiwan, the inﬂ  uence of classical styles has remained stronger.
Characters
The earliest extensive examples of written Chinese date from late in the second millennium 
BCE. These are the so-called oracle bone inscriptions ( jia ˇ gu ˇ wén), 
inscribed or painted on ox bones and the bottom plate (the carapace) of tortoise shells. This early writing made use of characters whose forms differed in appearance but can still be directly related to modern characters. During the Qin dynasty (221–206 
BCE), the script was modiﬁ  ed and standardized as part 
of the reform of government administration. The resulting style, known as the ‘little seal’ (xia ˇ o zhuàn), is still used on ofﬁ  cial seals (or ‘chops’). At ﬁ  rst glance, 
little seal characters look quite unlike the modern versions, but a native reader can often discern the correspondences.
A script known as lìshū came into extensive use during the Han dynasty (202 
BCE–220 CE). Individual strokes in the lìshū style are described as having a 
‘silkworm’s head and swallow’s tail’. It is still used occasionally for writing large characters. The modern script, the kind generally used for printed matter, is based on the ka ˇ ishū ‘model script’ that has been in use since before the period known as the Southern and Northern Dynasties (5th and 6th centuries). Other varieties of script were developed for handwriting (xíngshū ‘running script’) and calligraphy (ca ˇ oshū ‘grass script’). Illustrations of the development of Chinese script can be found at websites such as Simon Ager’s ‘Omniglot’: www.omniglot.com/writing/chinese_evolution.htm.
Traditional and simpliﬁ  ed characters
In the past, simpler and more complex versions of characters have often coex-
isted. In many cases, the more complicated were used for formal correspon-dence, and the simpler were used for personal communications. In the 1950s, however, as part of a program to promote literacy in the PRC, a set of simpler 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale Universityxliv INTRODUCTION
characters, most of them based on attested forms, were promoted as a general 
standard for all printed matter. Singapore adopted the new forms for most purposes, but Taiwan, Hong Kong, and most overseas communities kept the traditional forms; as a result, both types of (formal) characters are now in use in the Chinese-speaking world. In English, they are usually referred to as ‘traditional’ and ‘simpliﬁ  ed’. The two types are illustrated below, using the phrase Zhōngguórè ‘fascination with Chinese’ (‘middle-kingdom-hot’), roughly 
pronounced [joong-kwoh-ruh].
Traditional Simpliﬁ  ed
! ᒦ઼ሤ ! ᒦਪེ
Zhōngguórè Zhōngguórè
The three characters cited illustrate the differences nicely. Many characters 
have only one form (like zhōng); many show slight differences (like rè); others (like guó) show signiﬁ  cant differences but are easily relatable. Relatively few—
no more than a few dozen—are completely different, and most of those are commonly encountered. So the differences between the two sets of characters are not as signiﬁ  cant as might be imagined. A native speaker sees the relation-ship between the two fairly easily and, using context, moves from one to the other without much difﬁ  culty. Students generally write only one style, but they should be comfortable reading either.
Homophony
Characters represent syllable-length words (or rather, morphemes—the small-est meaningful units of language). Since, in Chinese, these units are short, the chance of homophony is relatively high, more so than in English. In English, words pronounced the same are often written the same, as is the case for the ‘pens’ of ‘pig pen’ and ‘ink pen’. It is also common in English for different words of identical pronunciation to be written differently, such as ‘to’, ‘too’, and ‘two’. Written Chinese is more comparable to the latter case: words with the same pronunciation but different (and unrelated) meanings are written 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityINTRODUCTION  xlv
with different characters. A syllable such as shi can be written dozens of ways, 
depending on the meaning, as the Chinese linguist Yuen Ren Chao demon-strated in a tour de force whose title was:
!߉ ͩ! !ࢴ໽! ΫShī shì shí shī shı ˇ
(‘[Shi] clan eat lion story’)‘The tale of how Shī of the Shì clan ate the lion.’
Chao’s tale continues for another 100 or so characters, all pronounced shi in 
one of the four tones. It is written in the very concise prose of Classical Chinese, which is normally read out with modern sound values; so while it is just intel-ligible as written language, it is completely unintelligible as spoken. However, written in modern Chinese, many of the words would be disyllabic (shī ‘lion’, for example, would be shīzi), and the result would probably be intelligible. However, Chao’s exercise makes the point nicely: characters represent words—units of sound and meaning—and letters represent sounds only.
Transcribing sound in characters
Characters are sometimes used only for their sound values, with the usual meanings ignored. In this way, Chinese characters can be used to transcribe foreign sounds. So, just as English speakers use Roman letters to write Chinese, Chinese speakers sometimes use Chinese characters to write English (or other languages). Here is an example from a very simple Chinese-English teaching manual from the Mainland (with Chinese written in simpliﬁ  ed characters, and English written in the Romanized system of transcription that you will soon learn). See if you can ﬁ  gure out what English sentence is represented.
!ڎ෱!ႝ!໋!ಽ!ႋ!!ࡻᅊ!ႅ!ጠ!ᎉ!ई!োăÀi-mu ˇ  sōu pu ˇ -lì-sī-dé tu ˇ sī-yī yóu è-gēn.
Characters are regularly used for their syllabic value, in this way, to translit-
erate personal names, names of places, and sounds: ྿ိ܈዇ Shāshìbı ˇ yà 
‘Shakespeare’; මᇝᇝ܈ Mìxīxībĭ ‘Mississippi’. Because characters can only be 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale Universityxlvi INTRODUCTION
used for syllabic units, the match is not usually as good as it would be in an 
alphabetic system, which can match a symbol to each consonant and vowel sound.
Pictograms, ideograms, logograms
Because some Chinese characters derive from attempts to represent objects pictorially, they are sometimes called ‘pictograms’. However, as you will see in the character units, the majority of modern characters do not derive directly from pictorial representations; even in those cases which do, changes in the form of graphs brought about by processes of standardization and writing reform over the centuries have generally obscured any representational origins. That is not to say that Chinese characters do not have certain aesthetic qualities that can be exploited in poetry and art; it is just that these qualities do not necessarily play a signiﬁ  cant role in ordinary reading or writing.
Because the form of characters is not determined by sound, graphs can be 
borrowed for their meaning and given an entirely different pronunciation. So, for example, the character ̋ shān, which originated as a representation of a 
mountain, can be borrowed into Japanese to represent ‘yama’, the Japanese word for ‘mountain’. (The same property is found in Arabic numerals: the graph ‘8’ is read ‘eight’ in English, ‘osiem’ in Polish, ‘tám’ in Vietnamese, and so on.) This property of characters, together with the pictorial origins of many of the simple graphs, has given rise to the notion that Chinese characters somehow represent meaning directly without the mediation of words, hence the term ‘ideogram’. This misconception is a result of viewing characters as single entities, outside of normal contexts. In running texts (in Chinese, Japa-nese, or even Classical Chinese), it is quite clear that readers have to identify words and contexts that are linguistic, not just in the realm of thought, in order to perceive meaning. Neither the term ‘pictogram’ nor ‘ideogram’ applies to Chinese characters.
Writing systems are better named according to the units that they encode. 
Thus, the English writing system basically encodes speciﬁ  c sounds (phonemes), though there are some word symbols as well (e.g., &, $, %). Chinese basically encodes words, though characters may sometimes be called upon to represent 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityINTRODUCTION  xlvii
syllables. Using technical names, English writing is primarily phonographic, 
and Chinese is primarily logographic.
Representing the sounds of Chinese
Alphabetic systems for writing Chinese date back at least to the 16th century. Most have made use of Roman letters, and are therefore called Romanizations (often written with a capital letter). We can illustrate some of the systems, using the compound word for ‘Chinese [spoken] language’:
Wade-Giles Chūngkuó huà
Yale Jūnggwó hwà
National Romanization Jong-guo huahHànyu ˇ PīnyīnZ hōngguó huà
Zhùyīn Fúhào υϚϗ οϚύʖ ρϚόʘ
The Wade-Giles system (named for its originator Thomas Wade, a professor 
of Chinese at Cambridge University at the turn of the 19th century, and Herbert 
Selling New Year scrolls, Táibe ˇi
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale Universityxlviii INTRODUCTION
A. Giles, a consular ofﬁ  cer and, later, Wade’s successor at Cambridge who 
incorporated the system into his dictionary) was used for many years in library catalogues and in most English-language publications on China. It is known for distinguishing the plain initial consonants from the aspirated (g from k, d 
from t, etc., in the pinyin system) by use of an apostrophe: kuo versus k’uo, for 
example, or chung versus ch’ung. (This is phonetically quite sensible since both 
sounds are voiceless in Chinese.)
The Yale system grew out of work performed by the U.S. War Department 
during World War II and was used in the Yale textbook series, familiar to several generations of students of Chinese. As much as possible, it used the values of English letters to represent Chinese pronunciation, so it is the most transparent of all the Romanization systems (for speakers of English). National Romanization, a system that had ofﬁ  cial status in China during the 1930s, incorporates tone in the spelling (notice that there are no tone marks above the vowels), which makes it invaluable for learning and retaining tones. Hànyu ˇ  Pīnyīn is the ofﬁ  cial system of the PRC and has been accepted by most 
of the rest of the world, including, recently, Taiwan.
Finally, Zhùyīn Fúhào (‘indicating-sounds transcription’), the last of the 
systems illustrated, is colloquially called Bopo mofo after the ﬁ  rst four letters of its alphabet. It has a longer history than pinyin, based on a system created in 1919 called Zhùyīn Zìmŭ (‘indicating-sounds alphabet’) that was intended to serve as a full-ﬂ  edged writing system. It was inspired by the Japanese ‘kana’ system, whose symbols derive from characters rather than Roman letters. Bopo 
mofo symbols have the advantage of appearing Chinese and not suggesting any particular English (or other language’s) sound values. In Taiwan, children, as well as many foreign students, learn to read with materials in which Bopo mofo is written vertically to the right of corresponding characters to indicate pronunciation.
Hànyŭ P īnyīn
Pīnyīn (‘spelling the sound’) was developed and ofﬁ  cially adopted by the PRC 
in the 1950s, and it is now used in textbooks, dictionaries, reference sources, computer input systems, and on road and shop signs in Mainland China. In 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityINTRODUCTION  xlix
recent years, some schools in China have been encouraging children at certain 
stages in their education to write essays in pinyin to improve composition and style, and it is not unlikely that its functions will continue to expand in the future.
It is sometimes claimed that pinyin (or any other such system of transcribing 
the sounds of Mandarin) cannot serve as a full-ﬂ  edged writing system because the degree of homophony in Chinese is such that some reference to characters is necessary for disambiguation. This is certainly true in the case of the shi story 
cited earlier, and it might be true for Classical Chinese in general. However, it is certainly not true for texts written in colloquial styles. Anything that can be 
understood in speech can be written and understood in pinyin. Many people e-mail successfully in pinyin without even indicating the tones! The question is, using pinyin, how far one can stray from colloquial speech and still be understood. Written styles range from the relatively colloquial to the relatively classical, but if the latter can be understood when read aloud, then they can presumably be understood when written in pinyin.
ڻઔ!໡हǈڻଜᑱ෕ڻઔᆅहǈڻଜۋᆀBăihuā qífàng, băijiā zhēngmíng!‘Let a hundred ﬂ  owers blossom and a hundred schools of thought  contend!’(‘100-ﬂ  owers together-blossom, 100-schools [of thought] contend’)
Key Terms
Peoples Republic of China (PRC)The MainlandThe Republic of China (ROC)TaiwanHong Kong (Xiāng Găng)Bĕijīng (Peking)Bĕipíng (Peiping)
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale Universityl INTRODUCTION
Qīng (Manchu) dynasty (1644–1911)
Míng (Han) dynasty (1368–1644)Yuán (Mongol) dynasty (1271–1368)
1842
19121949
Máo Zédōng
Chiang Kai-shek (Jiăng Jièshí)Sun Yat-sen (Sūn Yìxiān)
Chinese
Guānhuà (ofﬁ  cials’ language)
MandarinGuóyŭ (national language)Pŭtōnghuà (ordinary language)
Standard Chinese
Classical Chinese (Wényán)Báihuà (vernacular written Chinese)Táiyŭ (Taiwanese Minnan)Taiwanese Mandarin
Hànyŭ P īnyīn
Wade-Giles
Zhùyīn Fúhào ( Bopo mofo)
lingua francadialectsregional languages Cantonese Fujianese (Hokkien) Kejia (Hakka) Shanghainese
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityINTRODUCTION  li
oracle bone inscriptions (jiăgŭwén)
little seal characters (xiăozhuàn)model script (kăishū)traditional characters (fántĭzì)simpliﬁ  ed characters (jiăntĭzì)
homophonypictogramsideogramslogograms
NOTES
1. Endymion Wilkinson, Chinese History: A Manual, Harvard-Yenching Monograph Series 32, 
revised and enlarged edition (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000), p. 753.
2. B. V. Pires, “Origin and Early History of Macau”, in R. D. Cremer, ed., Macau: City of Com-
merce and Culture (Hong Kong: UEA Press, 2000), p. 11.
3. Ibid, p. 15.
Further reading and references
Chao, Yuen Ren. Mandarin Primer. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1948.
Chen, Ping. Modern Chinese. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.DeFrancis, John. The Chinese Language: Fact and Fantasy. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i 
Press, 1984.
DeFrancis, John, ed. ABC Chinese-English Dictionary. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 
1999.
Erbaugh, Mary S., ed. Difﬁ  cult Characters: Interdisciplinary Studies of Chinese and Japanese 
Writing. Pathways to Advanced Skills, publication series volume VI. National Resource 
Center, The Ohio State University, 2002.
Hannas, William C. Asia’s Orthographic Dilemma. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 1997.Newnham, Richard. About Chinese. Penguin Books, 1971.Norman, Jerry. Chinese. Cambridge Language Surveys. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1988.
Ramsey, Robert S. The Languages of China. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1987.Wilkinson, Endymion. Chinese History: A Manual. Harvard-Yenching Monograph Series 52. 
Harvard University Asia Center, revised and enlarged, 2000.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityIn the Imperial Palace, Be ˇijīng
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversitySOUNDS  AND SYMBOLS
1The writer was required at school to read his lessons aloud sixty times; that was for 
reading books in his own language.—Yuen Ren Chao, talking about himself in Mandarin Primer (Harvard University Press, 1961)
This lesson serves as an introduction to the pronunciation of standard Chinese 
(Mandarin) and to the Hanyu Pinyin transcription system (‘pinyin’). Pinyin will represent pronunciation and be your written code for conversational or ‘sayable’ material in Chinese. This lesson introduces the whole system but pays particular attention to those elements that you will need in order to actually use the language in the next lesson, that is, tones, initials, and certain ‘rhymes’. The units that follow this lesson will provide you with actual language (transcribed and, in many cases, recorded for you). You will be able to refer back to this lesson both to conﬁ  rm 
information and to ﬂ  esh out the system. As you proceed through the units, you will 
be learning to relate sound to symbol so that you can accurately read out and write down the Chinese language samples that you will be practicing.
Contents
0.1 Syllable components (Exercise 1) 3
0.2 Tones (Exercise 2) 60.3 Initial consonants (Exercise 3) 120.4 Rhymes (Exercises 4, 5, 6) 170.5 Miscellany 23
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University2 SOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS
0.6 Writing connected text in pinyin 25
0.7 Recapitulation (Exercise 7) 27
Coda 30
To learn to speak a language, you need to master its sounds. This is not easy. 
It requires changing habits of articulation that were deeply internalized during the ﬁ  rst few years of your life and are now quite automatic. It also requires learning to pay attention to sounds that may have no particular importance in your native language but are crucially important in the new one. What is more, while you are establishing these new habits, you have to hold on to the old. Eventually, you will learn to switch between two systems, but while you are learning, there is bound to be interference from the ﬁ  rst language (which will 
likely be English for most users of this book). In the early stages of language learning, recordings will help, but the critical role will be played by your teachers, who have advice, know the pitfalls, and can provide timely feedback.
As you learn Chinese, you need to be able to write down the new language, 
not simply in an ad hoc fashion, but in a way that allows you to have an unam-biguous record of the pronunciation. As you know, Chinese has an aesthetically pleasing but mnemonically challenging character writing system. Even though many characters do offer phonetic hints to those who know where to look, they offer no information about pronunciation at all to the learner. To cite a particu-larly clear case: ෸ is pronounced mù, ೶ is lín, and ྽ is sēn. The graphs are 
additive; the sounds are not. Of course, English is not completely reliable either; words like ‘lead’ can be pronounced [leed] or [led], and the three spellings ‘to,’ ‘too,’ ‘two’ all have the same sound. However, words written in an alphabetical system almost always provide some sort of phonetic hint that helps in the recovery of sound. (Exceptions in English would be signs such as + or & that offer no help to the uninitiated; they are, in fact, functionally like characters.)
The solution for the learner is a system of transcription that represents the 
sounds of Chinese with relatively few symbols and uses them consistently, so that—unlike English—words can be pronounced reliably. The Introduction (p. xlix) mentioned a number of such systems used for Chinese in the past, many of them with virtues. The ofﬁ  cial system, used for textbooks, for reference 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversitySOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS  3
works, on signs, and for computer input, is Hanyu Pinyin, which means, liter-
ally, ‘Chinese spelling of sounds’. It was developed in the mid-1950s in China, under the guidance of the venerable Zhōu Yo ˇuguāng, who, at the time of this 
writing, was still alive and working at the age of 103.
Bĕijīng metro station sign, including characters and pinyin 
(the latter without tones)
0.1 Syllable components
0.1.1 Sound versus symbol (letter)
From the start, it is important to make a distinction between sound and the representation of sound. In pinyin, for example, jī represents a sound like [jee] (with ‘level tone’), qī represents [chee]. Neither is hard (for English speakers) to imitate, but the way the latter is represented—with a ‘q’ (and no subsequent ‘u’)—is counterintuitive and difﬁ  cult to remember at ﬁ  rst. On the other hand, 
pinyin r represents a sound that, for many speakers of standard Chinese, is a 
blend of the ‘r’ of ‘run’ with the ‘s’ (pronounced [ž]) of ‘pleasure’ (or the ‘j’ of 
French je)—in other words, an ‘r’ with friction. This sound may be difﬁ  cult for 
non-Chinese speakers to produce well, but associating it with the symbol ‘r’ is less problematical. So, as you learn pinyin, you may encounter problems of 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University4 SOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS
pronunciation on the one hand, and problems of transcription on the other. It 
is important to keep the distinction clear.
0.1.2 The syllable
When introducing the sounds of standard Chinese, it is useful to begin with the syllable, a unit whose prominence is underscored by the one-character-per-syllable writing system. The spoken syllable in Chinese is traditionally analyzed in terms of an initial consonant sound and a rhyme, the latter being everything other than the initial. Chinese schoolchildren, when focusing on pronunciation, often read syllables (which are usually also meaningful units) in an exaggerated initial-rhyme division: tuh + ù = tù ‘hare’, luh + óng = lóng ‘dragon’, etc.
The written pinyin syllable (as opposed to the spoken syllable) can also be 
usefully analyzed in terms of an initial (C
i) and a rhyme. The rhyme, in turn, 
contains vowels (V), tones (T) written above the vowels, medials (M), and endings (E). Of these, only the vowel is always present (as, for example, in the sentence-ﬁ  nal particle that is simply an untoned a). All possible pinyin syllables 
can be represented by the following formula (with V underlined as the only obligatory unit); there are so few options for M (medials) and E (endings) that they can be usefully listed in our formula.
INITIAL RHYME
T
Ci +  M  + V    +   E
  | |
i, u, ü i, o (but o+o = ou) and n, ng
Examples (which you need not know how to pronounce yet):
Vowel: a
Vowel/Tone: ā, è
Initial + Vowel/Tone: tā, bı ˇ , kè, shū
Initial + Medial + Vowel/Tone: xiè, zuò, duì, xué, jiù, nüé
Initial + Vowel/Tone + Ending: lèi, haˇo, hěn, máng
Initial + Medial + Vowel/Tone + Ending: jiāo, jiàn, jia ˇng
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversitySOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS  5
There are 21 pinyin initial consonants. They are usually presented in a chart 
of representative syllables, arranged in rows and columns (see section 0.3.1). 
Whether the initials are written with a single consonant letter (l, m, z) or several 
(sh, zh), they all represent only one sound unit (or phoneme). Chinese has no 
initial clusters—consonant blends—of the sort represented by ‘cl’ or ‘sn’ in English.
There are six possible (written) vowels: a, e, i, o, u, and ü (the last a ‘rounded 
high front’ vowel, as in German über or the last vowel of French déjà vu). Vowels can be preceded by medials ( i, u, ü) and followed by endings, two of which are 
written with vowel symbols (i, o) and two with consonants (n, ng). There is 
actually a third (written) vowel ending that can occur after the main vowel (in addition to i and o), and that is u. When the main vowel is o, the ending o is written u to avoid the misleading combination ‘oo’. Thus, to cite words from 
Unit 1, one ﬁ  nds haˇo and laˇo (both with a+o), but instead of ‘dōo’ or ‘zhōo’ 
(o+o), you get dōu and zhōu (both with u).
Notice that the inventory of consonant endings in Chinese is small—there 
are only n and ng. Regional languages, such as Cantonese, have more (-p, -t, -m, etc.). The English name of the Chinese frying pan, the ‘wok’, is derived from a Cantonese word with a ﬁ  nal [k] sound; its standard Chinese counterpart, 
guō
, lacks the ﬁ  nal consonant. In historical terms, standard Chinese has lost 
most ﬁ  nal consonants, while Cantonese has preserved them. Surnames often demonstrate this same distinction between the presence and absence of a ﬁ  nal 
consonant in standard Chinese and Cantonese: Lu/Luk, Ye/Yip, for example (see Unit 4, Appendix 2 for more examples).
Tones are a particularly interesting feature of the Chinese sound system and 
will be discussed in more detail below. For now, we note that stressed syllables may have one of four possible tones, indicated by the use of diacritical marks written over the main vowel (V). Unstressed syllables, however, do not have tonal contrasts; their pitch is, for the most part, conditioned by that of sur-rounding syllables.
Because medials, vowels, and some endings are all written with vowel letters, 
pinyin rhymes may have strings of two or three vowel letters, such as: iu, iao, 
uai. This can be confusing, particularly with ‘opposites’ such as iu/ui, ie/ei, and 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University6 SOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS
uo/ou, which represent quite different sounds. Later, there will be exercises that 
focus on such vowel combinations.
By convention, the tone mark is placed on the vowel proper, not on the 
medial or ending, as in: lèi, jiāo, zuò. As a rule of thumb, look to see if the ﬁ  rst 
of two vowel letters is a possible medial. If it is, then the following vowel letter is the core vowel, which receives the tone mark; if it is not, then this ﬁ  rst letter 
is the core vowel: liè, zhaˇo, xué, dōu, jiào.
Without trying to pronounce the syllables, place the tone marks provided over the correct letter of the pinyin representations.
xie (`) jiang ( ˇ) dui (`) hao ( ˇ) lian (ˇ) gui (`) zhou (
−) qiao (´)Exercise 1
One sound that is not shown in the syllable formula given above is the ﬁ  nal 
‘r’ sound. It is represented, not surprisingly, by r in pinyin, and is obligatory in a few words with the written e-vowel, such as èr ‘two’. In northern varieties of standard Chinese, a common word-building sufﬁ  x, appearing mostly in 
nouns and favored by some speakers and regions more than others, is also represented by a ﬁ  nal r: diaˇnr, huàr, bànr, huángr. The ﬁ  nal r often blends with 
the rest of the syllable according to rather complicated rules that will be dis-cussed in detail in later lessons.
0.2 Tones
Words in Chinese are pronounced with a regular tonal contour, much like the 
stress patterns that distinguish the English verb ‘reCORD’ from the noun ‘REcord’. In Chinese, the word la ˇoshī ‘teacher’, for example, is pronounced 
laoshi 
(‘low’ followed by ‘high’). In English terms, this is like having to say TEAcher rather than teaCHER or TEACHER (with both syllables stressed) each time you say the word. The presence of tones in Chinese is often cited as another of those lurid features that make the language unique and difﬁ  cult to learn; but 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversitySOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS  7
tones are, in fact, not unique to Chinese and probably no more difﬁ  cult to learn 
than stress or intonation is for learners of English.
As noted earlier, there are four basic tones in Mandarin. This is far fewer than 
some of the regional Chinese languages. Cantonese, for example, is usually ana-lyzed as having four tones on two levels, plus one, for a total of nine. Mandarin also differs from many of the regional languages in having a predilection for words with (non-initial) toneless syllables: shūshu ‘uncle’; xíngli ‘luggage’.
0.2.1 The four tones
It is difﬁ  cult to learn to produce or even recognize tones from descriptions, though we will use the descriptive terms ‘high (and level)’, ‘rising’, ‘low’, and ‘falling’ as a way of referring to them. These terms are only suggestive of the actual shape of the tone, but they do underscore the symmetry of the system: a high and a low, a rising and a falling. In modern Chinese, though the tones have formal names (that can only be rationalized by reference to earlier stages of the language), it is common practice to refer to them numerically by using the numbers 1–4 (yī, èr, sān, sì) and the word for sound, shēng [shuhng]: yīshēng, 
èrshēng, sānshēng, sìshēng. (Toneless syllables are called qīngshēng ‘light-toned’.) 
In English, we can also refer to the tones as ‘ﬁ  rst’, ‘second’, ‘third’, and ‘fourth’. As noted earlier, in pinyin, tones are indicated by marks placed over the main vowel letter.
Tones
ā high ﬁ rst yīshēng
á rising second èrshēng
aˇ low third sānshēng
à falling fourth sìshēng
a context dependent qīngshēng
0.2.2 Tone conceptsTo learn to produce tones, it is useful to conceive of them in particular ways. The ﬁ  rst tone, for example, which has a high and level contour, can be thought 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University8 SOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS
of as sung out, because singing a syllable in English usually results in a sus-
tained level pitch similar to the high tone. The second tone, which rises from mid-low to high, can be associated with doubt or uncertainty: ‘Did you say “tea”? “milk”? “Mao”? “Wang”?’ The third tone is the subject of the next para-graph, but the fourth tone, which falls from very high to low, can usefully be associated with list ﬁ  nal intonation: ‘One, two, three (all rising), and four!’ For 
many people, the fourth tone contour is also associated with certainty: ‘I said “Wèi”’ or ‘It’s late.’
0.2.3 The low tone
You will notice that the pinyin symbol for the low tone is v-shaped, suggesting a contour that falls, then rises. In isolation, it does indeed fall and rise: ha ˇo ‘be 
good’; woˇ ‘I; me’; jia ˇng ‘speak; explain’. In close conjunction with a following 
syllable (other than one with the same low tone, as shown below), it tends to have a low, non-rising pitch.
If you can ﬁ  nd a Chinese speaker to model the following phrases (from Unit 
1), try listening for the relatively low pitch in the low-toned syllable, hěn [huhn] ‘very; quite’, that appears at the beginning of the following phrases.
hěn gāo ‘tall’hěn máng ‘busy’hěn lèi ‘tired’
For most speakers, a low-toned syllable in the second position of a phrase 
will also stay low, without much of a rise. Again, if you can ﬁ  nd a speaker 
to model the following phrases, see if you agree that the second syllable is primarily low.
shūfaˇ ‘calligraphy’
tuántı ˇ  ‘group’
kànfaˇ ‘point of view’
For learners, regarding the third tone as ‘low’, before learning that it rises 
in certain contexts, produces better results than learning it as a falling-rising pitch and only canceling the ﬁ  nal rise in certain contexts. So we will refer to 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversitySOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS  9
the third tone as ‘low’, and to produce it, you aim low and add the ﬁ  nal rise 
only when the syllable is isolated.
0.2.4 Toneless syllables
Syllables in initial position in Mandarin almost always have one of the four tones, but those following a toned syllable can be toneless. In Chinese, such syllables have qīngshēng ‘the light tone’. In this respect, Mandarin contrasts with some regional Chinese languages such as Cantonese, in which almost all syl-lables are toned, regardless of their position in the word.
Mandarin toneless syllables are of two types: those which never have full 
tones and those which can have tones but may become toneless after a stressed syllable. The question particle, ma, is an example of the ﬁ  rst: Máng ma? ‘Are 
[you] busy?’ The ﬁ  nal ma never has a tone. Other common examples are the 
many compound words with iambic stress pattern such as xíngli ‘luggage’ and shūfu ‘to be comfortable’. The second type will be discussed in Unit 2, after you have examples to refer to.
0.2.5 The tone chart
The chart below uses twelve of the most common surnames to illustrate the four tones. In Chinese, the surname is the ﬁ  rst component of the full name, not the last (e.g., Lı ˇ  in Lı ˇ  Liánjié—Jet Li’s Chinese name). In the chart, the four 
tones are characterized in terms of their pitch contours (high and level, rising, etc.) as well as by the four heuristic concepts (sung out, doubt, etc.) that will help you to produce them correctly. 
TONE :1 2 3 4
Zhōu Wáng Lı ˇ Wèi
Zhāng Máo Ko ˇng Dù
Gāo Chén Ma ˇ Zhào
Description: high, level rising low (with rise) falling
Concept: sung out doubt (?) low ﬁ nality (!) 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University10 SOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS
The following short sentences consist of the pronoun tā ‘he; she’, the verb 
xìng [sying] ‘to be surnamed’, and one of the twelve surnames presented above. Keeping your tone concepts in mind and, ideally, with feedback from a Chinese speaker, focus on the different tones of the surnames while pronouncing the sentences.
Tā xìng Zhāng.   ‘His/Her surname is Zhang.’Tā xìng Máo.Tā xìng Wèi.Tā xìng Wáng.Tā xìng Ko ˇng.
Tā xìng Zhōu.Tā xìng Dù.Tā xìng Gāo.Tā xìng Ma ˇ.
Tā xìng Chén.Tā xìng Zhào.Tā xìng Lı ˇ.Exercise 2
0.2.6 An aside on the history of Chinese tones
Tone systems as complex as those of Chinese are a feature of dozens of lan-guages spoken in China and adjoining regions of mainland Southeast Asia, including the national languages of Burma, Thailand, and Vietnam. One tends to think of tone as being primarily a matter of pitch—like notes in a song. Pitch is controlled by stretching or loosening the vocal chords in the throat, rather like what happens when you stretch or loosen the mouth of a balloon. Tone is often more than just pitch. Even in standard Chinese, it is also associated with length; the rising tone, for example, is noticeably shorter than the high, level tone. In Southeast Asian languages, such as standard Vietnamese and Burmese, 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversitySOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS  11
tone involves quality of voice as well as pitch (and length), so descriptions of 
tones may include terms like ‘breathy’ or ‘creaky’. The term ‘tone’, therefore, covers a complex set of features.
While tones may be a more or less permanent feature of the region, tone 
systems may appear, evolve, or even disappear within particular languages. Evidence from ancient Chinese rhyme tables and other sources indicates that the various Chinese tonal systems evolved from an earlier system which, like the current standard, also consisted of four tones. The modern Mandarin pro-nunciation of the names of the four ancient tones are: píng ‘level’, sha ˇng ‘rising’, 
qù ‘going’, and rù ‘entering’. The last was found only with checked syllables, those ending with stopped consonants such as ‘k’, ‘t’, and ‘p’, which, as noted earlier, are no longer found in Mandarin, but survive in Cantonese and other regional Chinese languages. This four-tone system evolved differently in dif-
Special attention to the rising tone, Chéngdū
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University12 SOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS
ferent dialect groups. In standard Cantonese, for example, the four-tone system 
split into two sets of four tones each, with one set relatively higher than the other; an additional distinct tone derived from another split, providing a total of nine distinctive tones.
You may feel fortunate that the Mandarin dialects did not undergo the same 
development as Cantonese. In Mandarin, the ancient four-tone system remained as four tones, but they underwent a redistribution. Words with the rù tone, for example, are no longer a distinctive set in Mandarin; they have joined with words whose tones were originally píng, shaˇng, or qù. The rù-toned words 
were distinguished mainly by the ﬁ  nal stopped consonants (‘p’, ‘t’, ‘k’), and once those were lost, the rù tone was no longer distinct from the other three tones.
In another Mandarin development, píng-toned words split into two groups 
and formed two of the four modern tones, ﬁ  rst tone (high and level) and second 
tone (rising), a development that is reﬂ  ected in the names of those tones in modern Chinese, yīnpíng and yángpíng. Yīnpíng arose from píng-toned syllables 
with yīn—or voiced initial consonants; yángpíng arose from píng-toned syllables 
with yáng—or voiceless initials. So the modern tones that you ﬁ  nd in the stan-
dard language, though still four in number, are neither pronounced the same way nor found on the same words as in the four-tone system that existed some 1,500 years ago.
A more detailed discussion of both the historical development of tone in 
Chinese and the tonal systems found in other varieties of Chinese can be found in books such as Norman (1988), listed at the end of the Introduction.
0.3 Initial consonants
First, note that many pinyin letters are pronounced similarly to their English 
equivalents; the l in la ˇo, for example, is very like the English ‘l’, and the pinyin 
f, s, n, and m all have more or less the same values in Chinese and English 
scripts. Unfortunately, such cases are liable to make you think of English even when pinyin letters have values that are rather different. Below is a table of symbols that represent all possible initial consonants of Chinese. Following 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversitySOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS  13
Chinese custom, they are presented with a particular set of vowels and ordered 
from front of the mouth (labials) to back (velars and glottals).
0.3.1 The consonant chart
First, letters w and y, which do appear initially in pinyin (e.g., the numbers wu ˇ ‘ﬁ ve’ and yī ‘one’), are treated as special cases of medial u and i, respectively, 
in initial position. Thus, instead of ‘ī’, one ﬁ  nds yī; instead of ‘u ˇ’, wu ˇ; instead 
of ‘iě’, yě; instead of ‘uo ˇ’, woˇ; etc. This will be discussed again in detail later.
Second, the vowels conventionally placed with the different classes of initials 
to make them pronounceable turn out to be some of those that have quite idio-syncratic values for speakers of English. Thus, the o in the ﬁ  rst line of the table 
below is not pronounced like the English long vowel ‘o’ but more like the vowel sound in the word ‘paw’; the e in the second line is pronounced [uh]; the i in the third and fourth lines represents a continuation of the initial into a buzz (e.g., zi [dzz]; zhi [jrr]), but in the ﬁ  fth line it represents the more expected [ee] 
(e.g., ji [jee]). The vowel sounds will be discussed in §0.4 below, but for now, you 
can use the hints provided in the far right column of the chart and imitate your teacher or the audio. You should learn to declaim (for sound) and write (for symbol) this table, line by line, as soon as possible: bo po mo fo, de te ne le, etc.
PLACE  OF 
ARTICULATION (I) (II) (III) (IV)CONSONANT  
HINT  VOWEL  
HINT
(1) lips bo po mo fo [waw]
(2) tongue tip at 
teeth^ de te ne le [uh]
(3) ﬂ  at tongue at 
teeth _ zi ci si [dsz/tsz/ssz] not [ee]
(4) tongue tip 
raised! zhi chi shi ri [r], not [ee]
(5) spread lips /H20855 /H20856 ji qi xi [ee]
(6) back of tongue 
high ge ke he [uh]
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University14 SOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS
0.3.2 Notes on the consonant chart
COLUMNS  I AND II In English, the distinction between sounds typically written 
‘b’ and ‘p’ or ‘d’ and ‘t’ is usually said to be one of voicing (vocal chord vibra-
tion): with ‘b’ and ‘d’, voicing begins relatively earlier than with ‘p’ and ‘t’. However, in Chinese, the onset of voicing of the column I consonants is dif-ferent from that of English. The sound represented by b in pinyin is actually between the English [b] and [p]; that represented by d is between the English [d] and [t], etc. This is why the Wade-Giles system of Romanization (mentioned in the Introduction) uses ‘p, p’ ’ (i.e., p, p-apostrophe) rather than ‘b, p’ (T’aipei rather than Taibei). In phonetic terms, both b and p are voiceless in pinyin, but 
the ﬁ  rst is unaspirated while the second is aspirated (that is, accompanied by a noticeable explosion of air). Being aware of this will help you to adjust to what you hear; in fact, the English letters ‘b’, ‘d’, and ‘g’ are not highly voiced by most speakers (compared to their equivalents in, say, French and Spanish), so if you pronounce them ‘lightly’ in Chinese, you will not have too strong an accent. Contrast: bo/po, de/te, ge/ke; and zi/ci, zhi/chi, ji/qi.
ROW 1 These consonants are ‘labials’, or those whose pronunciation involve 
the lips. The pinyin o (not ou) only appears after the labials (bo po mo fo) and 
is, for many English speakers, pronounced like [aw] in ‘paw’. Everywhere other than after labial consonants, the same sound is written uo. Thus bo, po, mo, 
and fo rhyme with duo, tuo, nuo, and luo (the latter set not shown in the table 
above). In other words, o by itself always equals uo (and never ou). Apparently, the creators of pinyin felt that, following labial initials, it was not necessary to indicate the labial onset with ‘u’. It will be important to keep the sound of o/uo separate from that of ou. The last (ou) rhymes with both syllables of the English exclamation ‘oh no’.
ROWS  3, 4, AND 5— THE CRUCIAL  ROWS ! With z, c, and s in row 3, the tongue is 
tense but ﬂ  at and touching the back of the teeth near the gum line. The letter 
i, following row 3 initials, is not pronounced [ee]; it simply represents a continu-ation of the consonant sound. So, for zi, ci, and si, think [dzz], [tsz], and [ssz] 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversitySOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS  15
(as indicated in the far left column). English does not have consonant sounds 
comparable to the ﬁ  rst two row 3 initials, z and c, except across root boundar-
ies: pads, cats. In German and Russian, though, similar sounds do occur at the beginning of words, such as in German zehn [dz-] ‘ten’, or Russian cená [ts-] 
‘price’. The latter example, also written with a ‘c’, demonstrates the Russian inﬂ uence on the creators of pinyin.
With zh, ch, sh, and r in row 4, the tongue is pulled back and the tip is raised 
toward the roof of the mouth (on or near the rough area behind the teeth known as the alveolar ridge) in what is called a retroﬂ  ex position. When preceding vowels without lip rounding (all but o or u), including i as in the table (zhi, etc.), the lips are tight and slightly spread, which allows teachers to see and hear whether the retroﬂ  ex series is being pronounced correctly. As with the row 3 initials, the letter i in this position represents only a buzz. So, for zhi, 
chi, shi, and ri, think [jr], [chr], [shr], and [rr]. In English, an ‘r’ following a 
consonant will often produce the retroﬂ  ex articulation of the tongue that is characteristic of the row 4 consonants. Another way to ensure that your tongue is in the correct position for those initials is to match zh to the ‘dr’ of ‘drill’, ch to the ‘tr’ of ‘trill’, sh to the ‘shr’ of ‘shrill’, and r to the ‘r’ of ‘rill’.
Finally, with j, q, and x of row 5, the tongue is positioned like the ‘yie’ in 
English ‘yield’. This time, the letter i is pronounced [ee], so for ji, qi, and xi, 
think [jyee], [chyee], and [syee]. Later, you will see that row 5 initials are followed only by the written vowels i and u. The ﬁ  rst will always be pronounced [ee] in this context; the second will always be pronounced [ü]. Every time you encounter row 5 initials, think i is [ee] and u is [ü].
T
HE INITIAL  R OF ROW 4 Pronunciation of the letter ‘r’ varies considerably 
among languages: the Scots trill their tongue tips; the Parisians ﬂ  utter their 
uvulas; the Spanish ﬂ  ap their tongues; and the well-known American television 
interviewer, Barbara Walters, pronounces it like a cross between [r] and [w]. The Chinese r is different again; it has a little bit of a buzz to it. Like zh, ch, 
and sh, it is retroﬂ  ex (with tongue pushed back and tip raised) so it resembles 
the initial sound of English ‘rill’ or ‘ridge’, but it also has friction like the ‘s’ in ‘pleasure’ (or French je ‘I’). You will observe considerable variation in the 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University16 SOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS
quality of the Chinese r, depending on the following vowel and on the particular 
speaker. Examples: rén, rè, rù, ràng, ruò, ròu, rì.
Try pronouncing the following syllables, randomly selected from the ini-tials in rows 3, 4, and 5. Know your chart of initials before you try this!
qī sıˇ zhī zì jī qī sì rì chī
xī shì cì zhı ˇ qí sī chıˇ jí xí
Now try pronouncing these well-known Chinese names.
Cí Xı ˇ Qí Báishí Lı ˇ  Shízhēn QízhōuZ h āng Zı ˇyí
(last empress) (famous 
calligrapher)(16th-century herbalist from Qizhou)(actress)Exercise 3
0.3.3 An expanded chart of initials
The conventional chart of initial consonants exhibits a rather restricted and idiosyncratic set of rhymes. We can make the chart more comprehensive by adding one or two lines to each row, as follows. (Unfortunately, because not all combinations of rhyme and tone are possible, this version of the chart requires you to shift tone in certain cases.)
(I) (II) (III) (IV)
(1) bō pō mō fō
bānp ānm ānf ān
(2) dé tè né lè
duō tuō nuó luó
dài tài nài lài
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversitySOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS  17
(I) (II) (III) (IV)
(3) zī cī sī
zaˇoc aˇos aˇo
(4) zhī chī shī rī
zhuō chuō shuō ruò
zhōuc hōus hōu ròu
(5) jī qī xī
jù qù xù
jiānq iānx iān
(6) gē kē hē
gānk ānh ān
0.4 Rhymes
A table showing all possible rhymes follows below. It is too long and compli-
cated to be quickly internalized like the chart of initials, but you can practice reading the rows aloud with the help of a Chinese speaker. You can also map your progress through the rhymes by circling syllables, or adding meaningful examples, as you learn new words.
The table is organized by main vowel (a, e, i, o, u, ü), and then within 
each vowel by medial (i, u, and ü) and ﬁ  nal (i, o/u, n, ng). The penultimate 
column, marked ‘w/o C
i’ (i.e., ‘without initial consonant’), lists syllables 
that lack an initial consonant (with the rarer ones placed in parentheses) and thus begin with a (written) vowel or medial (the latter always represented with an initial y or w). The ﬁ  nal column provides pronunciation hints. Asterisks (*) following certain row numbers indicate sets that require special atten-tion. Final r, whose special properties were mentioned above, is treated separately.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNTONED  EXAMPLESW/O 
CIPRONUNCIATION  
HINT
The a rhymes (1) a ta cha da ma ba la a
(2) a-i tai chai dai mai bai zai ai
(3) a-o tao chao dao pao zao rao ao
(4) a-n tan ran zhan can lan pan an
(5) a-ng dang sang zhang mang lang zang ang
(6) i-a jia qia xia ya
(7) i-a-o jiao qiao xiao yao
(8)* i-a-n jian qian xian yan [yen]
(9) i-a-ng jiang qiang xiang yang
(10) u-a hua gua zhua shua wa
(11) u-a-i chuai (wai)
(12) u-a-n huan guan zhuan shuan cuan wan
(13) u-a-ng huang guang zhuang shuang wang [wahng]
The e rhymes (14) e zhe che she re le e [uh]
(15) e-i zhei shei lei fei bei (ei) [(h)ay]
(16) e-n zhen shen fen gen men en [uhn]
(17) e-ng leng sheng  ceng deng zheng (eng) [uhng]
(18)  i-e jie xie lie mie ye [yeh]
(19)* u-e jue que xue nüe lüe yue [yüeh]
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityThe [ee] 
rhymes(20a) i li bi ti yi [yee]
(20b) i ji qi xi yi [yee]
(21) i-n jin qin xin lin bin yin [yeen]
(22) i-ng jing qing xing ling bing ying [yeeng]
23)* u-i dui gui shui rui chui wei [way]
The ‘buzzing’ i rhymes(24)* i zi ci si [dzz, tsz  .  .  .]
(25)* i zhi chi shi ri [jr, chr  .  .  .]
The o rhymes (26)* o bo po mo fo [-waw]
(27) u-o duo tuo guo shuo zuo wo [waw]
(28)* o-u zhou zou dou hou chou ou [oh]
(29) o-ng zhong dong long zong
30)  i-o-ng jiong qiong xiong yong
The [oo] rhymes(31) u shu lu zhu zu cu wu [woo]
(32)* u-n shun lun zhun kun cun wen [wuhn]
(33)*  i-u jiu qiu xiu liu diu you [yeo]
The ü rhymes (34)* u ju qu xu lü nü yu [yü]
(35)* u-n jun qun xun  yun [yün]
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University20 SOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS
0.4.1 Notes on the i and u rhymes and C i
Recall that, in the C i chart presented earlier, the row 4 C i (zh, ch, sh, r) are dis-
tinguished from the row 5 C i (j, q, x) by position of the tongue. In terms of 
English sounds and spellings, the distinction between ‘j’, ‘ch’, and ‘sh’ depends 
upon tongue position—‘dr, tr, shr’ (zhi, chi, shi) versus the ‘y’ of ‘yield’ ( ji, qi, 
xi). This difference, even if appreciated, seems, nonetheless, very slight. Indeed, it would be much more difﬁ  cult to perceive if the vowels following these initial consonants were identically pronounced. But they never are!
Note that row 5 C
i initials ( j, q, x) are only followed by the medial sounds 
(not the written letters) [ee] and [ü], written i and u, respectively. Here are some examples (which can be read with a level tone).
ji, jie, jian, qi, qie, qian, xi, xie, xian; ju, jue, jun, qu, que, qun, xu, xue, 
xun.
Row 3 and row 4 C
i, on the other hand, are never followed by the medial 
sounds [ee] or [ü].
zhi, zi, zhu, zu, zhan, zan, chi, ci, chu, cu, chan, chen, etc.
Because the creators of pinyin let i and u each represent two different sounds, 
this complementary distribution is obscured: the vowels of ji and zhi look alike, but they do not sound alike; the same is true for ju and zhu. Therefore, if you hear [chee], it must be written qi, for the sound [ee] never follows ch; if you hear [chang], it must be written chang, for q can only be followed by the sound [ee]. This may sound complicated—and it is—but there is plenty of practice to come, beginning with Exercise 4.
0.4.2 The value of the letter e
The value of e also violates the expectations of English speakers. It is pro-nounced [uh] in all contexts (zé, dēng, chén), except after a written i or u, when 
it is pronounced [eh] (xiē, niē, xuē), or before a written i, when it is pronounced 
[ay] as in the English word ‘way’ (lèi, bèi, zéi).
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversitySOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS  21
The following syllables all contain the written vowels i and u. Practice 
reading them clearly, with a single tone. As with all the exercises in this lesson, repeat this procedure daily, thinking of the relationship between initial and rhyme, until you feel conﬁ  dent.
chi qi xie qu chu chun jia qin cu qu shun
qun shu ju ci xu zi zhu shi xi xia quExercise 4
Practice reading the following syllables containing pinyin e.
chén wèi zhēn xiē bèn rén lèi rè běi jiè è lěng zéi chē bié
Now try pronouncing the following proper names, all of which contain pinyin e, ei, or ie.
Zhōu Ēnlái Máo Zédōng Jia ˇng Jièshí Héběi
(premier) (chairman) ‘Chiang Kai-shek’ (province)
Lıˇ  Dēnghuī Éméi shān Lièníng Sòng Měilíng
(former Taiwan 
president)‘Emei Mountain’‘Lenin’ (wife of Chiang Kai-shek)Exercise 5
0.4.3 The o rhymes: ou versus uo/o
On early encounters, it is easy to confuse pinyin rhymes that are spelled simi-
larly, such as ou and uo. This can lead to some pronunciation problems that are very difﬁ  cult to correct later, so you need to make sure you master them early. The rhyme ou, with the leading o, is pronounced like the name of the English letter ‘o’, rhyming with ‘know’. The rhyme uo, on the other hand, with the trailing o, is pronounced like the vowel sound in ‘paw’. However, as you 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University22 SOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS
now know, after the row 1 C i, uo is spelled o: bo, po, mo, and fo rhyme with duo, 
tuo, nuo, and luo.
Try pronouncing these names and words that contain o.
Bōlán Sūzhōu Mòxīgē
‘Poland’ (city near Shanghai) ‘Mexico’
luòtuo Zhāng Yìmóu Zhōu Ēnlái
‘camel’ (ﬁ lm director) (premier)
luóbo Guō Mòruò bōluó
‘radish’ (20th-century writer) ‘pineapple’
Try pronouncing the following list of single syllables with o.
mōu tuō bō fó zhōu duō pò dōu zuò foˇu luó ròuExercise 6
0.4.4 The ü rhymes
Section 0.4.1 (after the list of rhymes) makes the point that many of the ü 
rhymes are revealed by the type of initial consonant. Following row 5 initials (j, q, x), u is always pronounced the same as ü; following any other initial, it is 
pronounced [oo]. This results in distinct pronunciations (with any particular tone) for: zhu/ju, chu/qu, and shu/xu, but similar pronunciations for pu, fu, du, 
ku, and hu. However, the sound [ü] also occurs after the initials n and l, as well as those of row 5. In these cases, ü may contrast with u, and the difference has to be shown on the vowel, not on the initial. Examples include: lù ‘road’ versus lü` ‘green’; nu ˇ ‘crossbow’ versus nü ˇ ‘female’. In addition to being a core vowel, 
ü also occurs as a medial. Again, when it follows row 5 initials, it is written as 
u: jué, quē, xuě; but following l or n, it is written as ü: lüèzì ‘abbreviation’; nüèji 
‘malaria’. In the latter cases, it is redundant, since there is no contrast between üe and ue.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversitySOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS  23
0.5 Miscellany
0.5.1 Tonal shifts
Before leaving the survey of sounds and notation, we need to return to the subject of tone, and take note of the phenomenon of tonal shifting (called ‘tone sandhi’ by linguists). It turns out that in certain contexts, Chinese tones undergo shifts from one to another. (In standard Chinese, the contexts where this occurs are very limited; in regional languages such as Hokkien, such shifts are much more pervasive, affecting almost every syllable.) We will mention these shifts here, and then practice producing them more systematically in later lessons.
0.5.2 Low-tone shift
If two low tones (tone 3) appear consecutively in the same phrase, the ﬁ  rst tone 
is pronounced with a rising tone:
3 + 3 → 2 + 3
low + low → rising + low
hěn + haˇo → hén haˇo ‘good’
hěn + lěng → hén lěng ‘cold’
Lıˇ  + laˇoshī → Lí laˇoshī ‘Professor Lee’
It is, of course, possible to have three or more low tones in a row, but such 
cases will be considered later.
0.5.3 Two single-word shifts
There also exist a few more idiosyncratic shifts that involve only single words. The negative, bu, is usually pronounced with a falling tone except when it is followed by another falling tone, in which case it shifts and is pronounced with a rising tone: bù haˇo ‘not well’, but bú lèi ‘not tired’. In the latter case, the result 
is a trajectory like the sides of a mountain, up then down, and students in the past have kept track of this shift by calling it the ‘Fuji shift’ (after Mount Fuji, which is, of course, in Japan, not China). Below, bu is shown in combination with some adjectival verbs (called stative verbs in Chinese grammatical tradi-
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University24 SOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS
tion); these sets (involving stative verbs from the conversational material in 
Unit 1) should be repeated regularly until fully internalized.
bù gāo ‘not tall’
bù máng ‘not busy’
bù haˇo ‘not well’
Tone shift: bú lèi ‘not tired’
bú è ‘not hungry’
bú rè ‘not hot’
bú cuò ‘not bad’
Another single-word shift involves the numeral yī ‘one’. In counting, and in 
many compounds, it is level toned (yīshēng): yī, èr, sān, sì ‘one, two, three, four’. 
When yī is grammatically linked to a subsequent ‘measure word’, it adopts the 
same tonal shift as bu, rising before a falling tone (yí fèn ‘a copy’), but falling before any other tone (yì bāo ‘a pack’).
yì zhāng ‘a [table]’
yì tiáo ‘a [ﬁ  sh]’
yì běn ‘a [book]’
But: yí fèn ‘a copy [of a newspaper]’
Note that the low tone shift (hěn + haˇo = hén haˇo) applies to any word (or 
syllable) that ﬁ  ts the grammatical condition (located within a phrase); but the 
shift from falling to rising affects only a few words, most commonly bu and 
yi.
0.5.4 The apostropheIn certain contexts, an apostrophe appears between the syllables of a compound written in pinyin: Xī’ān (a city in China); ha ˇi’ōu ‘seagull’; cho ˇng’ài ‘to dote on’. 
The apostrophe is used when a syllable beginning with a vowel letter (a, e, o) 
is preceded (without a space) by another syllable; in other words, where the syllable boundary is ambiguous. By convention, the apostrophe is only used when the trailing syllable begins with a vowel; a word like yīngān, with two 
potential syllable divisions (yīn-gān, yīng-ān), is always to be interpreted as yīn+gān, never yīng +ān (which would be yīng’ān).
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversitySOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS  25
0.5.5 Interaction of tone and intonation
You may wonder whether a tonal language like Chinese, in which pitch adheres to individual syllables (with some accommodation across syllables), permits intonational pitch movements of the sort associated with contrast, denial, cor-rection, and other kinds of emotional speech in English: ‘That’s a HIGH tone?!’ Nà shi PÍNGshēng ma?
It turns out that Chinese (and other tonal languages) do have intonation 
contours, but rather than obliterating the word tones, they envelope them, exaggerating the pitch contours of key words, while narrowing the pitch con-tours of others. In the example above, píng is louder and its pitch rises to an exaggerated height, while the other syllables are diminished with shorter but nonetheless distinctive contours. You will have plenty of opportunities to prac-tice superimposing intonation over tone as you work through the material in the core units.
People often ask about singing in tonal languages. Surely melody must oblit-
erate word tone, or else you would have to choose your words to ﬁ  t the melody 
and songs would resemble speech. The famous Chinese linguist Yuen Ren Chao (who provided the epigraph that began this lesson) considered this ques-tion in an article published in 1956 and concluded that, while the melodies of certain traditional song forms accounted for word tone, modern Chinese songs did not. Certainly, that is the way it appears. In the well-known folksong whose title translates as ‘The Couple Returning Home’ (०໔ၷၷڳଜથ Fūqī 
shuāngshuāng ba ˇ jiā huán), the ﬁ  rst two lines begin with fourth-tone words (ၥ 
shù ‘tree’ and ൊ lü` ‘green’), yet the ﬁ  rst is distinctly high in the melody, and 
the second is distinctly low. However, it should be noted that Wong and Diehl (2008) reached a different conclusion for Cantonese, which has a richer tone system than standard Chinese.
0.6 Writing connected text in pinyin
Unlike earlier systems of Chinese phonetic notation, some of which were 
intended as full-ﬂ  edged auxiliary writing systems that could co-exist with (or even replace) characters, pinyin was intended as an adjunct system to 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University26 SOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS
indicate pronunciation and provide a means for alphabetical organization. 
For this reason, the rules and conventions for writing connected text in pinyin were not well deﬁ  ned at ﬁ  rst. However, increasing use of computers for the input and production of text and in everyday communication, as well as the proliferation of contact between China and the rest of the world, has put a premium on the use of pinyin. Nowadays, in addition to its use in pedagogical materials such as this textbook, pinyin is widely used in e-mails, for word processing input, for Web and e-mail addresses, and to complement characters on advertisements, announcements, and menus (particularly those intended for an international audience in China and abroad).
In 1988, the State Language Commission issued a document with the 
translated title of “The Basic Rules for Hanyu Pinyin Orthography” and, with a few minor exceptions, this textbook conforms to those proposed rules. (The ABC Chinese-English Dictionary, cited at the end of the Introduction, 
contains a translation of this document as an appendix.) Only two general points need to be mentioned here. First, basic English punctuation practices hold. Sentences begin with capital letters, as do proper nouns, and they end with periods. Other punctuation marks are used more or less as they are in English.
Second, words, not syllables, are enclosed by spaces. Thus, ‘teacher’ is written 
laˇoshī, not la ˇo shī. Characters, by contrast, which always represent syllable-
length units, are evenly spaced regardless of word boundaries. Of course, deﬁ  n-
ing what a word is can be problematic, but pinyin dictionaries or glossaries can usually be relied upon to make those decisions for us. Other conventions, such as the use of the hyphen, will be noted in this book when needed. When you write pinyin, it should follow this format:
Gémìng bú shì qı ˇngkè chīfàn.
‘Revolution isn’t [like] inviting guests over for a meal.’(‘revolution not be invite-guests eat-meal’) —Mao Zedong
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversitySOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS  27
Writing pinyin in this way makes it readable. In fact, when e-mailing char-
acters is restricted by technical problems, pinyin is an acceptable substitute 
(even without tone marks) so long as the above orthographical conventions are observed, as in: Geming bu shi qingke chifan.
Tiějú Lane, Kūnmíng (now demolished): the sign reads zhĭ shēng yíge háizi hăo ‘just have one 
child’. Not only is the pinyin written without tones or word breaks, but shēng is written 
‘shen’ and ge is written ‘gou’, unintentionally reﬂ  ecting local pronunciation.
0.7 Recapitulation
This completes our survey of the sounds and transcription of Chinese. Already, 
you should be able to pronounce the names of Chinese people and places con-siderably better than the average television and radio newscaster or announcer. Exercise 7 reviews what you have covered in this lesson.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University28 SOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS
Write out the formula for all possible pinyin syllables; list the medials; list 
the ﬁ  nals. Correctly place the tone marks given in the parentheses over each of the following syllables.
xue (´) bei (
-) sou ( -) jie (`) bie (´) suo (ˇ)
List (or recite) twelve surnames, grouped by tone.
Write out the table of initial consonants. How many rows are there? Which 
rows are particularly problematic? What sounds can follow the row 5 ini-tials? How are those sounds written in pinyin?
Pronounce the following sets of syllables, being careful to contrast each 
pair.
Tone 1: qī/cī, xī/sī, jī/zī, qū/cū, xū/sū, jū/zū
Tone 2: zú/zhú, cí/chí, jí/zhí, xí/shí, shú/sú, qí/chí
Tone 3: zhě/lěi, gě/gěi, kě/f ěi, chě/děi
Tone 4: biè/bèi, liè/lèi, miè/mèi, niè/nèi
Tone 1: pō/pōu, bō/duō, luō/lōu, tuō/pō, mō/luō, tuō/tōu
Pronounce the following personal and place names.
Zhōu Ēnlái Máo Zédōng Jia ˇng Jièshí Cáo Yu ˇ
(premier) (chairman) ‘Chiang 
Kai-shek’ (20th-century playwright)
Lıˇ  Dēnghuī Lıˇ  Xiāngjūn Sòng Mě
 ilíng Wáng Zhìzhì
(former Taiwan president)(Ming dynasty beauty)(wife of Chiang) (basketball player)
Dèng XiaˇopíngZhū Róngjī(premier)Lıˇ  Xiaˇolóng
‘Bruce Lee’Cáo Cāo(Three Kingdoms period warlord) (post-Mao leader) Exercise 7
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversitySOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS  29
Běijīng Xī’ān Gua ˇngzhōu Zhèngzhōu
(capital) (city in 
Shaanxi)(city in 
Guangdong)(city in Henan)
SìchuānJ i āngxī Chóngqìng  Chu ˇxióng
(province) (province) (city in western 
China) (city in Yunnan)
Apply the tone-change rules to the following phrases.
hĕn lěng bu gāo lăobăn bu guì lăo Lĭ yi běn
‘cold’ ‘not tall’ ‘boss’ ‘cheap’ ‘old Lee’ ‘one book’
bu hăoy u ˇsaˇn bu duì nĭ h ăo bu cuò yi fèn
‘not good’ ‘umbrella’ ‘wrong’ ‘hello’ ‘not bad’ ‘one copy’
Read aloud the sets listed below. Each set of three syllables follows the 
pattern ‘rising, rising, falling’, like the usual list intonation of English ‘one, two, three’, or ‘boats, trains, planes’; lá, wéi, jìn! Note that in this exercise, 
not all syllables are actual Chinese words with the cited tone.
lá wéi jìn!
láo tái dù!sóu sí mìng!zí xiá qìng!ní zhí hòu!lái duó zhèn!fó qí cì!xíng cuó shì!móu guó shòu!rén béi zhà!
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University30 SOUNDS  AND  SYMBOLS
Coda
Chinese who studied English during the early years of the People’s Republic 
of China can often remember their ﬁ  rst English sentence, because in those days textbook material was polemical and didactic, and lesson content was care-fully chosen for content and gravity. Let your ﬁ  rst sentences also carry some 
weight and be appropriate for the endeavors you are about to begin.
჌ϝ଀ϝĂ჌֑଀֑Ą
Zhòng guā dé guā, zhòng dòu dé dòu.
‘[You] reap what you sow.’(‘plant melon get melon, plant bean get bean’)
̙ˢ܎ϱĂ஘଀܎̄Ą
Bú rù hŭxué, yān dé hŭzı ˇ.
‘Nothing ventured, nothing gained.’(‘not enter tiger-lair, how get tiger-cub’)
NOTES
a. xīguā ‘watermelon’
b. dòuzi ‘beans; peas’
c. la ˇ ohŭ ‘tiger’
Zàijiàn. ‘Good-bye.’ (‘again-see’)
Míngtiān jiàn. ‘See you tomorrow!’ (‘tomorrow see’)
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityBeijing road sign
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityLearning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityTHE CORE  UNITS
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityLearning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUnit 1
35Qiān lı ˇ zhī xíng shı ˇ yú zú xià.
‘A long journey begins with a single step.’
(‘1,000 mile journey begins with foot down’)—La ˇozıˇ 
This is the ﬁ  rst lesson in which you actually begin to use the language, 
starting with simple questions and responses about states (e.g., ‘Are you 
tired?’ / ‘Not very.’) and events (e.g., ‘Have you eaten?’ / ‘Yes, I have.’). In the course of presenting these simple interactions, you will be introduced to a range of verbs, pronouns, methods of asking ‘yes/no’ questions, and ways of answering afﬁ  rmatively or negatively. You will also learn how to count, give dates, greet, and take your leave. In the ﬁ  rst four units, you will be 
paying special attention to pronunciation and becoming more familiar with pinyin.
Contents
 1.1 Conventions 36
 1.2 Pronunciation 37 1.3 Numbers (cardinal and ordinal) 38 1.4 Stative verbs 40 1.5 Time and tense 45 1.6 Pronouns (Exercise 1) 48 1.7 Action verbs 51
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University36 THE CORE  UNITS
 1.8 Conventional greetings (Exercise 2) 56
 1.9 Greeting and taking leave 59 1.10 Tones (Exercise 3) 63 1.11 Summary 66 1.12 Rhymes and rhythms 67
1.1 Conventions
The previous lesson on sounds and symbols provided the ﬁ  rst steps in learning 
to associate the pinyin transcription of Chinese language material with accurate pronunciation. The task will continue as you start to learn to converse by listen-ing to conversational material while reading it in the pinyin script. However, in these early units, it will be all too easy to fall back into associations based on English spelling, and so, occasionally (as in the previous overview), Chinese cited in pinyin will be followed by phonetic hints in brackets, such as: máng [mahng] or hěn [huhn]. These are only intended to alert you to potential pro-blems and remind you of what you have been hearing on the audio and from your teachers.
Where needed, you will be provided with an idiomatic English translation 
of Chinese material in addition to a word-for-word gloss in parentheses. The latter takes you deeper into the world of Chinese linguistic concepts and allows you to better understand how meanings are composed. The following conventions are used to make the presentation of this information as clear as possible.
Parentheses (.  .  .) enclose literal meanings, e.g.: Máng ma? 
(‘be+busy Q’)
Plusses (+) indicate both meanings combined in the Chinese 
word, e.g., nín (‘you+POL’). Also used to distinguish, in certain cases, two particles, both pronounced de but written with different 
characters. See §2.8.3, e.g., shuō+de hěn ha ˇo.
Capitals (Q) indicate grammatical notions, e.g., Q for 
‘question’; POL for ‘polite’. In cases where there 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  1 37
is no easy label for the notion, the Chinese word 
itself is cited in capitals, with a fuller explanation to appear later: Nı ˇ  ne? (‘you NE?’)
Spaces ( ) appear around words, e.g., hěn haˇo versus 
shūfu. Spaces are also used instead of + in glosses, e.g., ha ˇochī (‘be good-eat’) rather than 
(‘be+good-eat’)
Hyphens (-) are used in standard pinyin transcription to link 
certain constituents, e.g., dì-yī ‘ﬁ rst’ or maˇma-
hūhū ‘so-so’. In the English glosses, hyphens indicate the meanings of the constituent parts of Chinese compounds: ha ˇochī (‘be good-eat’).
Brackets [ ] indicate pronouns and other material that is 
obligatorily expressed in one language but not in the other, e.g., Máng ma? ‘Are [you] busy?’ In deﬁ nitions, brackets enclose notes on style or 
other relevant information, e.g., bàng ‘be good; super’ [colloquial]. Finally, brackets also enclose phonetic hints and other indications of pronunciation other than pinyin, e.g., hěn [huhn].
Angle brackets /H20855 /H20856 indicate optional material: /H20855Nı ˇ/H20856 lèi ma? means 
that either Nı ˇ  lèi ma? or Lèi ma? are both 
possible.
Tildes (∼) indicate variant(s).
1.2 Pronunciation
1.2.1 Word Pairs
To get your vocal organs ready to pronounce Chinese, it is useful to contrast the articulatory settings of Chinese and English by pronouncing pairs of words selected for their similarity of sound. Thus, ka ˇo ‘to test’ differs from English 
‘cow’ not only in tone, but also in vowel quality.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University38 THE CORE  UNITS
(1) kaˇo cow (2) xìn sin (3) shòu show
haˇo how qín chin zhōu Joe
naˇo now jīn gin soˇu so
chaˇo chow[-time] xìn seen ròu row
saˇo sow[’s ear] jīn Jean dōu [s]tow
baˇo [ship’s] bow lín lean tóu toe
(4a) pō paw (4b) duō [s]to[r]e (5) bízi beads
bō bo[r]e tuō to[r]e lı ˇzi leads
mō mo[r]e luō law xízi seeds
1.2.2 Falling and level tones
Recall the chart of initials: bo, po, mo, fo, etc., and particularly rows 3, 4, and 5. 
Practice reading aloud the following syllable combinations with the falling tone (fourth tone). Note that they all contain the shifting i rhyme.
qi zi chi ri ci ji shi si xi zhi ci qi ji xi si chi
Hint: the best way to approach this task is to let the buzzing vowel (as in zi 
and zhi) be the default, and scan for the [ee] rhymes of row 5—ji, qi, and xi.
Now pronounce row 3 and 4 initials with the level tone (ﬁ  rst tone), unless 
otherwise indicated, with the ao
, ou, and uo rhymes.
chao shuo zao ròu zhuo zhao ruò shou rào suo cao 
zuo zhou
1.3 Numbers (cardinal and ordinal)
This section contains information that can be practiced daily in class by count-
ing or giving the day’s date.
1.3.1 The numbers 1–10
yī èr sāns ìw u ˇ liù qī bā jiu ˇ shí
12 3 4 5 67 891 0
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  1 39
1.3.2 Beyond 10
Higher numbers are regularly formed around shí ‘ten’ (or multiples of ten), with following numbers additive (shísān ‘thirteen’, shíqī ‘seventeen’) and pre-ceding numbers multiplicative (sānshí ‘thirty’, qīshí ‘seventy’).
shíyī shí’èr shísì èrshí èrshíyī èrshí’èr èrshísì sānshí sānshíyī
11 12 14 20 21 22 24 30 31
1.3.3 The ordinal numbersOrdinals are formed with a preﬁ  x, dì (which, by pinyin convention, is attached 
to the following number with a hyphen).
dì-yī dì-èr dì-sān dì-sì dì-wu ˇ
‘ﬁ rst’ ‘second’ ‘third’ ‘fourth’ ‘ﬁ  fth’
Later in the lesson, the ordinals can be practiced by class members reporting 
on order or placement; who is ﬁ  rst, second, third, and so on: Wo ˇ shi dì-yī; Woˇ 
shi dì-èr; etc.
1.3.4 DatesDates are presented in ‘contracting’ order in Chinese, with year listed ﬁ  rst (nián 
[nien]), then month (yuè [yu-eh]), and ﬁ  nally day (hào [how]). Years are usually 
presented as a string of digits (that may include líng ‘zero’) rather than as a single ﬁ  gure: yī-jiu ˇ -jiu ˇ -liù nián ‘1996’; èr-líng-líng-sān nián ‘2003’. Months are 
formed regularly with numerals: yīyuè  ‘January’, èryuè ‘February’, shí’èryuè 
‘December’.
èrlínglíngsān nián bāyuè sān hào August 3, 2003
yī
jiu ˇ bāwu ˇ  nián èryuè shíbā hào February 18, 1985
NOTES
a. Among northern Chinese, yīyuè often shows the yi tone shift when the month is followed 
by the day: yíyuè sān hào. With older speakers, the numbers qī ‘seven’ and bā ‘eight’, both level-
toned words, sometimes adopt the same shift when used in dates (and in some other contexts) prior to a fourth-tone word: qíyuè liù hào; báyuè jiu ˇ hào.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University40 THE CORE  UNITS
b. In the written language, rì ‘day’ (a much simpler character) is often used in place of hào. 
Thus, bāyuè sān rì ( ڭᏜྯ྇), which would be written and read out as such, would tend to be 
spoken as bāyuè sān hào (which, in turn, could be written verbatim as ڭᏜྯ੓).
1.3.5 The celestial stems
Just as English sometimes makes use of letters rather than numbers to indicate a sequence of items, so Chinese sometimes makes use of a closed set of words with ﬁ  xed order known as shígān ‘the ten stems’ or tiāngān ‘the celestial stems’ 
for counting purposes. The ten stems have an interesting history, which will be discussed in greater detail along with information on the Chinese calendar in a later unit. For now, they will be used in much the same way that, in English, Roman numerals or letters of the alphabet are used to mark subsections of a text, or turns in a dialogue. The ﬁ  rst four or ﬁ  ve of the ten are much more 
common than the others, simply because they occur early in the sequence. (Chinese people will be impressed if you can recite all ten!)
The ten celestial stems (tiāngān)
jiaˇ yı ˇ bı ˇng dīng wù jı ˇ gēng xīn rén guı ˇ
ଡጰࢷܻ ᇒ଄৏ ባ ྀ ਟ
ABC D E F G H I J
1.4 Stative verbs
The verb is the heart of the Chinese sentence. Young urban speakers of Chinese 
may slip material from English or other languages into the noun position in a sentence (Wo ˇ yoˇu lab. ‘I have a lab.’), and nouns with foreign origins, such as 
jítā ‘guitar’, have been incorporated into the language as a result of persistent contact with other cultures. Very rarely, however, does a foreign language inﬂ  u-
ence the verb position in Chinese.
Some comparisons with English also reveal the centrality of the verb to the 
Chinese sentence scheme. In Chinese, where the context makes the partici-pants clear, verbs do not need to be anchored with pronouns, as they do in English.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  1 41
Jiaˇ: Máng ma? ‘Are [you] busy?’
Yıˇ : Hěn máng. ‘[Yes, I] am.’
In English, ‘am’ is not a possible response to the question ‘Are you busy?’ 
A pronoun is required, such as, ‘I am.’ However, in the English answer, the 
verb ‘to be busy’ does not need to be repeated: ‘I am’ rather than ‘I am busy.’ Chinese behaves oppositely from English, as our example shows. Pronouns are often not expressed when the context makes the reference clear. On the other 
hand, verbs tend to be reiterated in the answer. Moreover, in Chinese, there is no need to anticipate the verb with a conﬁ  rmation (‘yes’) or denial (‘no’): Shūfu ma?/Hěn shūfu. ‘Are you comfortable?’/‘Yes, I am.’
1.4.1 Types of verbs
As you encounter words in Chinese, you will ﬁ  nd that it is useful to categorize them into groups and subgroups (traditional parts of speech and their sub-classes), such as nouns (including subtypes such as countable and non-countable), verbs (including subtypes such as transitive and intransitive), pronouns (including personal and demonstrative), and adverbs (including those of manner and degree). Such categories capture useful generalizations about how words behave. An adverb, for example, will always appear before a verb (or other adverb).
It is also useful to be able to talk about the components of a sentence: sub-
jects, predicates, adverbials, modiﬁ  ers, etc. A general schema for the sentence 
Hěn máng would be simply a predicate consisting of an adverb (hěn) and a verb (máng). It is not necessary to be adept at using the linguistic nomenclature, but it is useful to be able to understand the notion of classes of words and positions within sentence structure so that generalizations can be noted.
For Chinese verbs, it will be useful to distinguish a number of classes. In 
this lesson, we will focus on two. One resembles adjectives in English and many other languages: ha ˇo ‘be good’, máng ‘be busy’, è ‘be hungry’. As the English 
glosses show, these words do not require an additional form of the verb ‘to be’ (‘are, am, is’, etc.) when they are used as predicates in Chinese: Lèi ma?/Hěn lèi. ‘Are [you] tired?’ / ‘[I] am.’ The difference is shown by translating the 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University42 THE CORE  UNITS
Chinese words as ‘be+tired’, ‘be+good’, etc. Because such words convey states 
rather than actions, they are called ‘stative verbs’, abbreviated as SV. Strictly speaking, SVs should always be glossed as ‘be+adjective’ (when they function as predicates), but once the notion is familiar, we will often fall back on the more convenient practice of glossing them with English adjectives: máng ‘busy’; 
shūfu ‘comfortable’.
Another general class of verbs involves actions: chī ‘to eat’; xı ˇ  ‘to wash’; zo ˇu 
‘to walk; leave’. These will simply be called action verbs, abbreviated V
act.
1.4.2 Questions and positive responsesYou can begin by learning to ask questions with SVs and to give either positive or negative responses. Assuming that the context makes explicit (subject) pro-nouns unnecessary, then one way to ask ‘yes/no’ questions is to add the ﬁ  nal 
question particle ma to the proposal.
Haˇo ma? ‘Are [you] well?’
Máng ma? ‘Is [she] busy?’
Lèi ma? ‘Are [you] tired?’
È ma? ‘Is [he] hungry?’
Kě ma? ‘Are [you] thirsty?’
Jı ˇnzhāng ma? ‘Are [they] nervous?’
Shūfu ma? ‘Are [you] comfortable?’
Lěng ma? ‘Are [you] cold?’
Rè ma? ‘Is [it] hot?’
Gāo ma? ‘Is [she] tall?’
Duì ma? ‘Is [it] correct?’
NOTES
a. Lèi rhymes with ‘say’; duì (and wèi) rhyme with ‘way’.
b. è [uh]; cf. rè [ruh] and hěn [huhn]
c. jˇınzhāng [jeen-j!ahng]; shūfu [sh!oofoo]—! reminds you to raise the tip of your tongue toward 
the roof of your mouth.
Positive responses repeat the verb, usually with an adverb. The default adverb, 
when no other is chosen, is hěn ‘very’. However, in contexts such as these, hěn 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  1 43
does little more than support the positive orientation of the sentence, and so 
is best left untranslated. SVs such as duì ‘correct’, which do not permit gradi-ents, do not occur with degree adverbs such as hěn.
Máng ma? Hĕn máng. ‘[Yes, I] am.’
Kĕ ma? Hĕn kě. ‘[Yes, I] am.’ (Apply the tone rule!)
Gāo ma? Hĕn gāo. ‘[Yes, she] is.’
Duì ma? Duì. ‘[Yes, it] is.’
Notice that, unlike English, where the typical positive answer indicates afﬁ  r-
mation with ‘yes’ before going on to answer the question, Mandarin has only the direct answer.
1.4.3 Negative responses
Negative responses are usually formed with bù ‘not the case’. Recall that the tone is conditioned by that of the following syllable.
Máng ma? Bù máng. ‘[No, I]’m not.’
Kě ma? Bù kě. ‘[No, I]’m not.’
Gāo ma? Bù gāo. ‘[No, she]’s not.’
Duì ma? Bú duì. ‘[No, it]’s not.’
As with positive answers, Chinese has no direct equivalent to ‘no’, but simply 
offers a negated verb.
A less abrupt negative (but, again, not used with duì) is formed with bú (with 
tone shift) plus tài ‘too; very’.
Haˇo ma? Bú tài haˇo. ‘[No,] not very.’
Máng ma? Bú tài máng. ‘[No,] not too.’
Lèi ma? Bú tài lèi.
È ma? Bú tài è.
NOTE
Negative questions with ma, such as Nı ˇ  bú lèi ma? ‘Aren’t you tired?’, will be 
dealt with in a later unit. While such questions are easy to form in Chinese, the responses follow patterns unfamiliar to speakers of English.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University44 THE CORE  UNITS
1.4.4 V-not-V questions
Another way to form ‘yes/no’ questions is to present the verb and its negative, as though offering both options. The negative, bu, in these constructions is often toneless in normal speech, for example: ha ˇo bù ha ˇo is usually pronounced 
haˇo bu ha ˇo, or even ha ˇo bu hao. While V-ma questions slightly presuppose an 
answer congruent with the question, that is, positive for positive questions, negative for negative questions, V-not-V questions are neutral. At this stage, you can regard the two as essentially equivalent.
Rè ma? Hĕn rè.
Rè bu rè? Hĕn rè.
Lěng ma? Bù lěng.
Lěng bu lěng? Bú tài lěng.
Other examples:Duì bu duì? Duì.
Haˇo bu haˇo? Hěn haˇo. (Apply the tone rule!)
Máng bu máng? Bù máng.
Lèi bu lèi? Hěn lèi.
È bu è? Bú tài è.
Kě bu kě? Hěn kě. (Apply the tone rule!)
Lěng bu lěng? Hěn lěng. (Apply the tone rule!)
Rè bu rè? Bú tài rè.
Jı ˇn/H20855zhāng/H20856 bu jıˇnzhāng? Bù jı ˇnzhāng.
Shū/H20855fu/H20856 bu shūfu? Bù shūfu.
NOTE
With two-syllable SVs, the second syllable of the ﬁ  rst, positive part of V-not-V questions often 
gets elided, as indicated by /H20855 /H20856 in the last two examples.
1.4.5 Three degrees of responseYou can respond to the two kinds of ‘yes/no’ questions positively, neutrally, or negatively. The typical neutral response makes use of the adverb hái (or, before other adverbs, háishi) ‘still; yet’: hái ha ˇo ‘so-so; [I]’m okay (still okay)’.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  1 45
Questions and responses involving SVs (ha ˇo, máng, lèi, è, kě, lěng, rè, gāo, 
shūfu, jı ˇnzhāng, duì)
YES/NO QUESTIONS RESPONSES
MA V-NOT-V + 0 −
Lèi ma? Lèi bu lèi? Hěn lèi. Hái haˇo. Bú lèi.
Bú tài lèi.
Jı ˇnzhāng ma? Jı ˇn bu jı ˇnzhāng? Hěn jı ˇnzhāng. Hái haˇo. Bù jı ˇnzhāng.
Bú tài jı ˇnzhāng.
1.5 Time and tense
1.5.1 Today, yesterday, and tomorrow
Speakers of English and other European languages take the verbal category of tense for granted: speaking of the past generally requires the past tense. For Chinese (as well as many other languages), this is not so. Time words, such as jīntiān ‘today’, zuótiān ‘yesterday’ (both of which share the root tiān ‘sky; day’), or dates, may be added to simple sentences containing SVs without any change to the form of the verb, or any other addition to the sentence.
Zuótiān lěng ma? ‘Was [it] cold yesterday?’ /H20855Zuótiān/H20856 bú tài lěng.
Zuótiān rè bu rè? ‘Was [it] hot yesterday?’ /H20855Zuótiān/H20856 hĕn rè.
Zuótiān hĕn máng ma?  ‘Were [you] busy yesterday?’ /H20855Zuóti
ān/H20856 hĕn máng.
Jīntiān lèi bu lèi? ‘Are [you] tired today?’ /H20855Jīntiān/H20856 hái hăo.
Èrshíbā hào lěng ma?  ‘Was it cold on the 28th?’ /H20855Èrshíbā hào/H20856 hĕn lěng.
Note the differences in word order between the English and the Chinese in 
the previous examples.
Lěng ma? Hĕn lěng. Was it cold? It was cold.
Zuótiān lěng ma? Was it cold yesterday?
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University46 THE CORE  UNITS
The appearance of a time word such as míngtiān ‘tomorrow’ (or a date) can 
be sufﬁ  cient to indicate that an event is certain to occur in the future—some-
thing that is also true of English.
Woˇ míngtiān hěn máng.   ‘I’m busy tomorrow.’
However, at times, Chinese does require some additional acknowledgment 
of the fact that, unlike the past and present, the future is uncertain. Thus, in talking about future weather, the word huì ‘can; will; likely to’ is, in many cases, 
added to the statement of futurity: Míngtiān huì hěn lěng ma? / Míngtiān bú huì 
tài lěng. ‘Will [it] be cold tomorrow?’ / ‘No, tomorrow won’t be that cold.’ Huì, while it does correspond to the English ‘will’ in this example, is not actually as common as the latter. For the time being, you should be cautious about talking about future states.
1.5.2 Le: small word, big role
Rather than the static notion of past versus present (or, more accurately, past 
versus non-past), Chinese is more sensitive to a dynamic notion of ‘phase’ or ‘change’. For example, if a speaker wishes to underscore the relevance of a new 
situation, he or she can signal it by the addition of the sentence-ﬁ  nal particle le.
Zuótiān bù shūfu, jīntiān hăo le.   ‘[I] didn’t feel well yesterday, but 
 [I]’m better today.’
In this case, the English has no word that can be said to correspond to the 
Chinese le. In other contexts, however, the sense of le might be conveyed by 
the use of words such as ‘become’, ‘now’, or ‘[not] anymore’.
An explicit contrast between an earlier situation (zuótiān) and a current one 
(jīntiān) typically triggers this use of le. But it is also possible to state the situ-ation before and after without underscoring the change with a ﬁ  nal le.
Zuótiān hěn lěng, jīntiān hěn rè.   
 ‘Yesterday was cold; today’s quite  hot.’
Unlike tense in English, which appears under conditions that can be explic-
itly stated (including ‘time before the time of speaking’), ‘change of state’ is 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  1 47
more a question of interpretation. Sometimes the change will loom large in 
the mind of the speaker (or writer); sometimes it will not. Even notions such as ‘change of state’ or ‘new situation’ are only partial views of the overall function of le in Mandarin discourse. In §1.7.2 below, for example, you will see that, with V
act, le takes on a different complexion. Eventually, you will gain 
some insight into how the different functions of le relate, but at this point, it is best to proceed incrementally, distinguishing functions as they are encountered.
This is a good time to introduce some additional words that can signal prior 
and current time.
Earlier:yı ˇqián ‘formerly; before; used to [be]’ (‘take as before’)cóngqián ‘before; in the past’ (‘from-before’)běnlái ‘originally; at ﬁ  rst’ (‘root-come’)
Current:xiànzài ‘now; at present’ (‘current-now’)zuìjìn ‘recently; lately’ (‘most-near’)mùqián ‘at present; currently’ (‘eyes-before’)
Examples:
Yı ˇqián hĕn jĭnzhāng, xiànzài hăo le. ‘[I] was nervous before, but 
  [I]’m okay now.’
Xiànzài bú è le! ‘[I]’m not hungry anymore!’
Yı ˇqián bù shūfu. ‘[It] used to be uncomfortable.’
Jīntiān rè le! ‘[It]’s gotten hot today!’
Zuótiān hěn lèi, jīntiān hěn máng. ‘Yesterday [I] was tired [and] 
  today [I]’m busy!’
Běnlái hěn máng, xiànzài haˇo le. ‘[I] was busy at ﬁ  
 rst, but [I]’m 
  okay now.’
Mùqián hěn lěng, hěn bù shūfu. ‘[It]’s quite cold at present; [it] 
  doesn’t feel very nice.’
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University48 THE CORE  UNITS
Běnlái hěn lěng, zuìjìn rè le. ‘[It] used to be cold, but lately 
  [it]’s hotter.’
Cóngqián woˇ bù shūfu, zuìjìn ‘I wasn’t comfortable before, but 
 hái haˇo.  recently [I]’ve been okay.’
NOTE
Observe that it is the new situation that is associated with le, not the original state. The presence 
of le generally cancels out the need for a supporting adverb, such as hěn.
1.6 Pronouns
As many of the examples above show, Chinese often manages to keep track of 
people (or things) relevant to a situation without the use of pronouns. However, pronouns are available where context alone might be insufﬁ  cient, or where it might otherwise be more appropriate to use one. The set of personal pronouns in Chinese is relatively simple and regular. They are presented in the following table, with notes following.
CHINESE  PERSONAL  
PRONOUNSENGLISH  PERSONAL  
PRONOUNS
SINGULAR COLLECTIVE SINGULAR PLURAL
First person woˇ woˇmen ‘I; me’ ‘we; us’
Second person nı ˇ, nín nı ˇmen ‘you, you [polite]’ ‘you [all]’
Third person tā tāmen ‘he, she, [it]; him, 
her’‘they; them’ 
NOTES
a. Tā tends to refer to people (or to animals being treated as if they were people) rather than 
to things. On those occasions when tā is used to refer to things, it is more common in object 
position, so it is more likely to occur in the Chinese equivalent of the sentence ‘put it away’ than in ‘it’s in the drawer’. Chinese sometimes uses a demonstrative (zhè ‘this’ or nà ‘that’) where English has ‘it’, but it often has no explicit correspondence at all.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  1 49
b. The form nínmen (‘you+POL-MEN’) is rare, but does sometimes occur in letters or formal 
speech. The -men sufﬁ  x (not usually toned, though sometimes cited in isolation with a rising 
tone) is most often found with pronouns, as shown. With nouns designating people, it can also occur as a ‘collective’: la ˇ oshī ‘teacher’, la ˇ oshīmen ‘teachers’. Even in such cases, -men should 
not be thought of as a plural marker, for it never combines with numerals: sān ge la ˇ oshī ‘three 
teachers’.
c. Mandarin speakers from Beijing and the northeast also make a distinction (found in many 
languages) between wo ˇ men ‘we’ (that collectively includes the speaker, addressee, and others) and zán or zánmen (pronounced ‘zámen’, as if without the ﬁ  rst ‘n’) ‘the two of us; we’. The 
latter includes the speaker and the person spoken to, but excludes others. For example: Zánmen 
zo ˇu ba! ‘Let’s leave [us, but not the others]’, a phrase worth storing away as a prototype example 
for zánmen.
1.6.1 Names
Where the identiﬁ  cation or status of a person requires more than a pronoun, Chinese has recourse to personal names or names and titles (cf. §1.9.1). Chinese students often refer to each other either by personal name (at least two sylla-bles), or by surname (xìng) preﬁ  xed by a syllable such as xia ˇo ‘young’. Thus, 
Liú Guózhèng may be addressed by friends as Guózhèng or xia ˇo Liú; Lı ˇ Dān, as 
Lı ˇ Dān (full name of two syllables) or xia ˇo Lıˇ.
1.6.2 The particle ne and the adverb yě
The particle ne, placed after subject nouns, has a number of uses. It may signal a pause for reﬂ  ection, something particularly useful for learners.
Zuótiān ne, zuótiān hĕn rè. ‘Yesterday  .  .  .  yesterday was hot.’Tā ne, tā h ĕn jĭnzhāng. ‘[As for] him, he’s quite anxious.’
The particle may also be used to signal follow-up questions. The response to 
a follow-up question often contains the adverb yĕ ‘also; too; as well’. Recall that adverbs are placed before verbs (including SVs) or other adverbs (such as bu).
Jiaˇ: Jīntiān lèi ma?
Yıˇ : Hĕn lèi, nĭ ne?
Jiaˇ: Wŏ y ĕ hĕn lèi.
Jiaˇ: Jīntiān rè bu rè?
Yıˇ : Hĕn rè.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University50 THE CORE  UNITS
Jiaˇ: Zuótiān ne?
Yıˇ : Zuótiān yĕ h ĕn rè.
Jiaˇ: Nĭ jĭnzhāng ma?
Yıˇ : Bù jĭnzhāng le. Nĭ ne?
Jiaˇ: Wŏ háishi hĕn jĭnzhāng.
Yıˇ : Ng.
Jiaˇ: Xiaˇo Wáng zuótiān bù shūfu.
Yıˇ : Jīntiān ne?
Jiaˇ: Jīntiān ha ˇo le.
Yıˇ : Ng.
NOTES
a. Háishi ‘still’; cf. §1.7.1
b. Spoken Chinese makes use of a variety of interjections. Ng (with pronunciation ranging 
from a nasalized [uh] to [n]) is one of them. On the falling tone, it indicates agreement or, as in the above example, understanding.
Write down and recite what you would say under the following circum-
stances; be prepared to shift roles.
 1. Ask your classmate if he was busy yesterday.
 2. Note that it’s quite cold today. 3. Remark that it’s gotten cold today. 4. Find out if young Li is nervous. 5. Respond that she is [nervous]. 6. Say that you are too. 7. Say you didn’t feel well yesterday. 8. Say that you’re better now. 9. Tell your friend that you’re not very hungry.Exercise 1
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  1 51
1.7 Action verbs
While SVs attribute emotional or physical states to people or things, action 
verbs (V act ) involve actions, such as eating or going to class. V act are often sub-
divided into ‘transitive’, those that generally presuppose an object (‘read → a book’; ‘eat → a meal’); and ‘intransitive’, those that do not presuppose an object (‘walk’; ‘kneel’). However, languages differ as to how this distinction is actually realized. In English, for example, when the verb ‘to eat’ means ‘to eat a meal’, there is the option of either not expressing an object (‘When do we eat?’), or using the generic noun ‘meal’ (‘We had a meal earlier’).
Chinese adopts a different strategy. In comparable sentences, rather than 
not mentioning an object for lack of a particular one, Chinese provides a generic object like ‘meal’: chīfàn ‘to eat; to have a meal’. The core meaning of fàn is ‘cooked rice’, but in conjunction with chī, it implies ‘food’ or ‘meal’. When a particular kind of food is mentioned, fàn is replaced by speciﬁ  c words: chī 
miàn ‘to eat noodles’; chī báifàn ‘to eat [white] rice’; chī b āozi ‘to eat dumplings’; 
chī za ˇodia ˇn ‘to eat breakfast’, etc.
Another case in which Chinese provides a generic object, where English has 
either an intransitive verb or one of a number of speciﬁ  c options, is xı ˇza ˇo ‘to 
bathe; to take a bath/shower’. Xı ˇza ˇo is composed of the verb xı ˇ  ‘to wash’ and 
zaˇo, an element that no longer has independent status, but is treated like an 
object. While English uses an intransitive verb ‘to bathe’ or a speciﬁ  c object ‘to take a bath’, Chinese provides a generic object, za ˇo. When a speciﬁ  c object is  10. Tell her that you’re okay today, but you were quite nervous before. 11. Ask your friend if she’s thirsty [or not]. 12. Find out if your classmate is comfortable. 13. Say that you’re not hungry anymore. 14. Say that she was wrong.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University52 THE CORE  UNITS
needed, it substitutes for za ˇo: xı ˇ yīfu ‘to wash clothes’; xı ˇ  liaˇn ‘to wash one’s 
face’; xı ˇ shoˇu ‘to wash one’s hands’.
The following table gives verbs and verb + objects for events that tend to 
happen in the course of a day. (Polite inquiries about bathing are appropriate 
in tropical or sub-tropical climates.)
VERB OBJECT V-O
zoˇu ‘to leave’
qı ˇ lái ‘to get up; to rise’
shuì ‘to sleep’ jiào (bound form) shuìjiào ‘to go to bed; to sleep’
chī ‘to eat’ fàn ‘cooked rice’ chīfàn ‘to eat; to have a 
[proper] meal’
xı ˇ ‘to wash’ zaˇo (bound form) xı ˇ zaˇo ‘to bathe; to take a 
bath,’ etc.
kàn ‘to look at’ bào ‘newspaper’ kànbào ‘to read the paper’
shàng ‘to ascend’ /H20878xià ‘to descend’kè ‘class’ shàngkè ‘to teach a class; to attend class’xiàkè ‘to ﬁ  nish class; to get out of class’
shàng ‘to ascend’ 
/H20878xià ‘to descend’bān ‘job; shift’ shàngbān ‘to go to work; to start work’xiàbān ‘to get out of work’
1.7.1 Negative statements
With V
act, the plain negative with bu usually indicates intention.
Wŏ bù zŏu. ‘I’m not leaving.’Tāmen bù xı ˇ zaˇo. ‘They’re not going to bathe.’
Tā bù chī le. ‘He won’t eat anymore.’
Such declarations, while possible, are in fact more likely to be cast in some 
less abrupt form, using verbs such as yào ‘to want’ or xia ˇng ‘to feel like; to 
think’. We will get to such verbs quite soon, but at this stage, rather than talking about intentions, we will focus on whether events have happened or not. In 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  1 53
such cases, the negation is formed with the negative of the verb yo ˇu ‘to have; 
to exist’. This is méiyo ˇu, or simply méi. (Yo ˇu is the one verb in Mandarin whose 
negative is not formed with bù—the one irregular verb, you could say.)
Méi chīfàn. ‘[We] didn’t eat; [we] haven’t eaten.’
Méiyo ˇu xıˇzaˇo. ‘[I] didn’t bathe; [I] haven’t bathed.’
Méi shàngbān. ‘[She] didn’t go to work; [she] hasn’t started work.’
Since the action verbs introduced in this lesson involve events that can be 
expected to take place regularly over the course of the day, the adverb hái (or háishi before other adverbs) ‘still; yet’ is common in negative answers. Hái /H20855shi/H20856 
is frequently accompanied by the sentence-ﬁ  nal particle ne, which generally 
conveys a tone of immediacy or suspense (as well as being associated with follow-up questions, cf. §1.6.2).
Hái méi chīfàn ne. ‘[We] haven’t eaten yet.’Hái méiyo ˇu xıˇzaˇo ne. ‘[I] haven’t bathed yet.’
Hái méi shàngbān. ‘[She] hasn’t started work yet.’
1.7.2 V
act with le
Vact may also appear with le. As noted in §1.5.2, le with SVs signals a change of 
state, or a newly relevant state: jīntiān ha ˇo le. With V act,  the function of le is 
more diffuse, or at least it seems so from a learner’s perspective. Le with V act, 
much as it does with SVs, may signal a newly relevant situation or phase. But with V
act, the initiation or conclusion of the action may be of relevance.
Initiation:
Zoˇu le. ‘[They]’re off.’
Chīfàn le. ‘[They]’ve started [eating].’Shàngkè le. ‘Class is starting.’
Conclusion:
Zoˇu le. ‘[They]’ve gone; [they] left.’
Chīfàn le. ‘[We]’ve eaten; [we] ate.’Shàngkè le. ‘[They]’ve gone to class; [they] went to class.’
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University54 THE CORE  UNITS
‘Conclusion’ may seem like another way of saying ‘past tense’, but there are 
reasons for avoiding any identiﬁ  cation of le with [past] tense. You have already 
seen that, with SVs, the past situation is not that which is marked with le, but 
the current one: Zuótiān bù shūfu, jīntiān ha ˇo le. You will also see many other 
cases where past tense in English does not correspond to the presence of le in 
Chinese. More to the point: injecting the notion of past tense into our descrip-tion of le suggests a static function quite at odds with that other, well-established dynamic function of le, to signal a particular relevance of an event to the current discourse—the story line that is being advanced.
For the time being, then, note that le has two faces: it signals the current 
relevancy of a new state or situation (in this case, le can appear with the nega-tive bù).
Lěng le. ‘[It]’s gotten cold.’Bù lěng le. ‘[It]’s not cold anymore.’Bù chī le. ‘[They]’re not eating anymore.’
The particle le can also signal the current relevance of a completed event (in 
which case it is negated by méi /H20855yŏu/H20856).
Shàngkè le. ‘Class is beginning; [they]’ve gone 
  to class.’
Hái méi/H20855yŏu/H20856 shàngkè ne. ‘[They] haven’t gone to class yet.’
Confusion about the several senses of le with V
act can often be resolved by 
the addition of an adverb, such as yı ˇjīng ‘already’.
Tāmen yı ˇ jīng zo ˇu le. ‘They’ve already left.’
Woˇ yıˇ jīng chīfàn le. ‘I’ve already eaten.’
Yıˇ jīng xiàbān le. ‘[He]’s already quit [for the day].’
1.7.3 QuestionsActions can be questioned with the question particle ma.
Chīfàn le ma? ‘Have [you] eaten [a meal]?’Xıˇ zaˇo le ma? ‘Have [you] bathed?’
Shàngbān le ma? ‘Has [she] started work?’
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  1 55
Actions can also be questioned with the V-not-V pattern, with the negative 
option reduced to méiyŏu (or just méi).
Chīfàn le méi/H20855yŏu/H20856?
Xıˇ zaˇo le méi/H20855yŏu/H20856?
Shàngbān le méi/H20855yŏu/H20856?
1.7.4 Summary of le patterns
POSITIVE NEGATIVE
Rè le.
‘It’s gotten warm.’Bú rè le.‘It’s not warm anymore.’
Chī le.‘[We]’ve started eating.’Woˇ bù chī le.
‘I’m not eating anymore.’
/H20855Yıˇ jīng/H20856 zoˇu le.
‘[He]’s /H20855already/H20856 left.’/H20855Hái/H20856 méi/H20855yŏu/H20856 zoˇu /H20855ne/H20856.
‘[She] hasn’t left /H20855yet/H20856.’
Tāmen /H20855yıˇ jīng/H20856 chīfàn le.
‘They’ve /H20855already/H20856 eaten.’Tāmen hái méi/H20855yŏu/H20856 chīfàn /H20855ne/H20856.
‘They haven’t eaten /H20855yet/H20856.’
1.7.5 Mini-conversations
Sections 1.1–1.7 present a considerable amount of information. The best way to internalize it is to practice short dialogues built around questions. Here are some examples. (The near synonyms kěshi and dànshì, used in the following two conversations, are both comparable to English ‘but’.)
DIALOGUE  A
Jiă: Xı ˇzaˇo le ma? ‘Have [you] bathed?’
Yıˇ : Xı ˇ le, kĕshì hái méi chīfàn. ‘I have, but I haven’t eaten yet.’
Jiă: È ma? ‘Hungry?’
Yıˇ : Hĕn è, nĭ ne? ‘Sure am; and you?’
Jiă: O, wŏ  .  .  .  wŏ y ĭjīng chī le. ‘Oh, me  .  .  .  I’ve already eaten.’
Yıˇ : Xiăo Bì ne? ‘And young Bi?’
Jiă: Yĭjīng zŏu le, shàngbān le. ‘[She]’s gone, [she]’s at work.’
Yıˇ : O, shàngbān le! ‘Oh, [she]’s gone to work!’
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University56 THE CORE  UNITS
DIALOGUE  B
Jiaˇ:Jīntiān hěn rè. ‘It’s hot today.’
Yıˇ :Ng, hěn rè. Nı ˇ chīfàn le ma? ‘Yeah, sure is. Have you eaten?’
Jiaˇ: Hái méi, wo ˇ bú è. ‘Not yet, I’m not hungry.’
Yıˇ :Jı ˇ nzhāng ma? ‘Anxious?’
Jiaˇ:Xiànzài ha ˇo le—dànshì 
 yıˇqián hěn jı ˇ nzhāng!‘[I]’m ﬁ  ne now—but I was before!’
Yıˇ :Chén Bó yı ˇ jīng zo ˇu le ma? ‘Has Chen Bo already left?’
Jiaˇ:Yıˇ jīng zo ˇu le, shàngkè qu le. ‘Yes, he has, he’s gone to class.’
NOTE
Shàngkè qu le, with a toneless qù ‘go’ indicating motion away, is more idiomatic 
than just shàngkè le.
1.8 Conventional greetings
1.8.1 The addition of guò (untoned)
Questions about eating are often used ‘phatically’, to be sociable rather than to 
seek actual information. There are a number of variants on the basic Chīfàn le ma that may serve this purpose. A particularly common variation used with verbs that describe regularly occurring events (such as having meals and going to work) involves the addition of a post-verbal guò (usually untoned), whose root meaning is ‘to pass by, over, through’. Guò can occur in both the question and in responses (positive and negative), but it can also be dropped from the responses, as demonstrated below.
Chīguo /H20855fàn/H20856 le ma?  
/H20877 Chī/H20855guo/H20856 le.
 Hái méi /H20855chī/H20855guo/H20856/H20856 ne.
1.8.2 ReductionsIn context, utterances are likely to be reduced along the following lines: méiyo ˇu 
→ méi; chīfàn → chī (however, xı ˇ za ˇo does not reduce to xı ˇ , since xı ˇ  alone means 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  1 57
‘to wash’ rather than ‘to bathe’). Thus, the following are all possible—though 
the more elliptical questions are likely to produce more elliptical answers. (The English glosses for the responses only suggest the differences. Notice that, in English, forms of ‘have’ can substitute for ‘eat’ or ‘eat one’s meal’.)
Chīfàn le ma? Chīfàn le. ‘I’ve eaten my meal.’
Chīguo fàn le ma? Chīguo fàn le. ‘I’ve had my meal.’
Chī le ma? Chī le. ‘I have.’
Chīguo le ma? Chīguo le. ‘I’ve had it.’
Chīfàn le méiyo ˇu? Hái méi chī fàn ne. ‘I haven’t eaten my meal 
  yet.’
Chīguo fàn le méiyo ˇu? Hái méi chìguo ne. ‘I haven’t had my 
  meal yet.’
Chīfàn le méi? Hái méi chī ne. ‘I haven’t eaten yet.’
Chīguo fàn le méi? Hái méi chìguo ne. ‘I haven’t had it yet.’
 Hái méi ne. ‘Not yet.’
Chī le méi?     
/H20877 Méiyŏu. ‘No.’
 Méi. ‘No.’
Typical expanded and reduced forms of questions and answers
ENGLISH  MEANING EXPANDED  FORM REDUCED  FORM
Done? Chīfàn le ma? Chī le ma?
Done? Chīguo fàn le ma? Chīguo le ma?
Done [or not]? Chīfàn le méiyo ˇu? Chī le méi?
Done [or not]? Chīguo fàn le méiyo ˇu? Chīguo le méi?
Done. Chīfàn le. Chī le.
Done. Chīguo fàn le. Chī le.
Not done. Méiyo ˇu chīfàn. Méi chī.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University58 THE CORE  UNITS
Ask and answer as indicated.
 1. Read the paper? / Not yet.
 2. Started work? / Yes, I have. 3. They’ve gone? / No, not yet. 4. Was it cold? / No, not very. 5. Have [they] ﬁ  nished work yet? / Yes, [they] have. 6. [We]’re not nervous anymore. / [You] were yesterday. 7. [I]’ve eaten. / Are [you] still hungry? 8. Bathed? / Yes, it was nice [comfortable]. 9. Are they out of class yet? / Not yet. 10. Thirsty? / Not anymore. 11. Hungry? / Not anymore, I’ve eaten. 12. Has class started? / Not yet. 13. Nervous? / I am now! 14. Young Wang’s in bed? / Yes, he’s already in bed. 15. Are they up? / Yes, but they haven’t eaten yet.
What would you say? (Use pronouns where necessary.)1. Ask your friend if she’s eaten yet. (three different ways)
2. Announce that she’s already left work [for the day].3. Explain that it was cold yesterday, but that it’s gotten hot today.4. Announce that she hasn’t gone to class yet.5. Explain that they’ve bathed, but they haven’t eaten.6. Explain that you were all unwell yesterday, but today you’re ﬁ  ne.
7. Explain that the ﬁ  rst’s already gone, but the second and third still 
haven’t.
8. Explain that it was warm yesterday, and that it is today as well.Exercise 2
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  1 59
1.9 Greeting and taking leave
1.9.1 Names and titles
Because even perfunctory greetings tend to involve a name and title, you need to have some rudimentary information about forms of address before being introduced to the language of greeting and leave taking. Below are ﬁ  ve common 
Chinese surnames, followed by a title which means, literally, ‘teacher’, and the SV haˇo, which in this context serves as a simple acknowledgment. La ˇoshī, which 
has no exact correspondence in English, can be applied to both males and females, as well as to all ranks of teachers.
Zhāng la ˇoshī ha ˇo. ‘Hello, Professor Zhang.’
Wáng lăoshī h ăo.
Lĭ lăoshī h ăo. [with tone shift]
Zhào lăoshī h ăo.
Chén lăoshī h ăo.
1.9.2 HelloUsing specialized greetings such as ‘hi’ or bonjour to acknowledge or conﬁ  rm 
the value of a relationship on every encounter is not a universal feature of cul-tures. The practice seems to have crept into Chinese relatively recently. Whereas in the past, people might have acknowledged your presence by asking where you were going or if you had eaten (that is, if they said anything at all to a stranger), urban Chinese today often make use of phrases like nı ˇ  haˇo in ways 
similar to English ‘hi’ or ‘hello’. Most people would probably regard nı ˇ  haˇo as 
the prototypical neutral greeting, but other options are listed below.
Nıˇ  haˇo! ‘Hi! Hello!’
Nín ha ˇo! [deferential] ‘How do you do?’
Hei! [exclamation] ‘Hey! Hi!’
Haˇo! ‘Hi! Hello!’
Haˇo ma? ‘You well?’
Nıˇ  haˇo a! [informal] ‘How’re you doing?’
Dàji ā
 haˇo. [to a group] ‘Hello, everyone.’ (‘big-family well’)
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University60 THE CORE  UNITS
A version of ‘good morning’, based on the verb za ˇo (‘be+early’), has been in 
common usage in Taiwan for some time and is now becoming more common 
on the Mainland as well.
Zaˇo! ‘Morning!’ (‘be+early’)
Zaˇo ān. ‘Good morning.’ (‘early peace’)
Nı ˇ zaˇo.
Nín za ˇo.
Expressions comparable to English ‘good afternoon’ or ‘good evening’ are 
also starting to be used in modern China. Thus, xiàwu ˇ  ‘afternoon’ and wa ˇnshàng 
‘evening’ are used in the expressions xiàwu ˇ  haˇo ‘good afternoon’ and wa ˇnshàng 
haˇo ‘good evening’. Wa ˇn ān ‘good night’ (‘late peace’), used as a sign-off at the 
end of the day, has a longer pedigree and is now commonly used by staff in larger hotels, for example.
In general, greetings of the sort listed above are used more sparingly than 
their English counterparts. Colleagues or classmates passing each other, for example, are less likely to use a formulaic greeting such as nı ˇ  haˇo, though rela-
tive cultural novelties such as fast food restaurants and toll booths may encour-age broader use. In general, though, a greeting to someone of higher status should be preceded by a name, or a name and title (as in §1.9.1).
1.9.3 Good-bye
Many cultures have conventional phrases for taking leave. Often, blessings serve this purpose (e.g., ‘bye’, from ‘good-bye’, supposedly derived from the phrase ‘God be with you’). Below are several Chinese variations of ‘good-bye’, beginning with the standard, zàijiàn (‘again-see’).
Zàijiàn. [neutral] ‘Good-bye.’ (‘again-see’)
Yìhuı ˇ r ∼ yíhuìr jiàn. [friendly] ‘See [you] soon.’ (‘awhile see’)
Míngtiān jiàn. [neutral] ‘See [you] tomorrow.’ (‘tomorrow 
see’)
Huíjiàn. [informal] ‘See [you] later; bye.’ (‘return-see’)
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  1 61
Huítóu jiàn. [friendly] ‘See [you] shortly.’ (‘return-head 
see’)
Màn zo ˇu. [friendly] ‘Take it easy.’ (‘slowly walk’)
NOTES
a. The addition of ﬁ  nal r to a written pinyin syllable represents a complex series of phonetic 
effects that will be considered more fully later. In the case of yìhuˇır ∼ yíhuìr, the ﬁ  nal r affects 
the quality of the preceding vowel, so that it is pronounced ‘ yìhuĕr ∼ yíhuèr’ rather than ‘yìhuˇır 
∼ yíhuìr’. The usual prescription applies: listen to your teacher or to the audio.
b. The alternate pronunciation yíhuìr may be more common in dialects found in southern 
China.
c. Students and other urban youth of all kinds often end a series of farewells with the English-
inﬂ uenced expression baibai.
d. As with greetings, when saying good-bye to an older person or a person of rank, it is normal to mention name and title ﬁ  rst, e.g., Wèi la ˇ oshī, zàijiàn.
1.9.4 Bon voyage
This is a good time to familiarize yourself with a few phrases that are used to wish people well when they leave on a journey, or to greet them when they arrive. The most common expression for bon voyage is:
Yílù-píng’ān.   (‘Whole-journey peaceful.’)
This expression applies to almost any journey, whether by air, ship, or bus. 
Yílù-shùnfēng (‘whole-journey favorable-wind’) has much the same meaning, but it is not used for journeys by air. Chinese people are generally superstitious about the effect of words, and many would usually deem it ill-advised to mention the word fēng ‘wind’ before a ﬂ  ight. Notice that both expressions contain four syllables, a favored conﬁ  guration in the Chinese lexicon.
In greeting someone returning from a long journey, instead of the question 
‘How was the ﬂ  ight/journey/voyage?’, Chinese people generally utter a variant of an expression that reﬂ  ects the traditional discomforts of travel.
/H20855Lù shàng/H20856 xīnku ˇ  ba?  ‘Tough journey, huh?’ (‘/H20855road on/H20856 bitter BA’)
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University62 THE CORE  UNITS
An analysis of these expressions is provided above, but at this stage, they 
should simply be memorized (by repetition) and kept in storage for greeting 
visitors or seeing people off.
Yílù-píng’ān!
1.9.5 Smoothing the transitions
A. PRIOR  TO ASKING  A QUESTION  In more formal situations, questions are often 
prefaced with the expression qı ˇ ngwèn (‘request-ask’), idiomatically equivalent to 
‘may I ask’ or ‘excuse me’. Qı ˇ ngwèn may also be preceded by a name and title.
Qı ˇngwèn, nı ˇ chīfàn le ma? ‘Excuse me, have you eaten?’
Zhào la ˇoshī, qı ˇngwèn, nín è bu è? ‘Professor Zhao, mind if I ask: 
  are you hungry?’
Qı ˇ ng ‘request; invite’ also occurs in the common phrase qı ˇ ng zuò ‘have a seat’ 
(‘invite sit’) and the expression qı ˇ ng jìn ‘won’t you come in’ (‘invite enter’).
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  1 63
B. PRIOR  TO LEAVING  In the normal course of events, a simple good-bye is often 
too abrupt for closing a conversation. One way to smooth the transition is to 
announce that you have to leave before you say good-bye. Here are four ways to accomplish this, all involving the verb zo ˇu ‘to leave; to go’. These expressions 
are complicated to analyze; some notes are provided below, but otherwise, they should be internalized as units.
Haˇo, nà wo ˇ zoˇu le. ‘Okay, I’m off then.’ (‘okay, in+that+case, I 
  leave LE’)
Hei, wo ˇ gāi zo ˇu le. ‘Say, I should be off.’ (‘hey, I should leave LE’)
Haˇo, nà jiù zhè ‘Okay then, that’s it, [I]’m off!’ (‘okay, in+that+
 yàng ba, zo ˇu le.  case, then this-way BA, leave LE’)
Bù za ˇo le, wo ˇ gāi ‘[It]’s late, I’d better be off.’ (‘not be+early LE,
 zoˇu le.  I should leave LE’)
NOTES
a. gāi / yīnggāi ‘should; must’; nà ‘in that case; well; then’; jiù ‘then’; ba (particle associated 
with suggestions); le ([here] signals a new situation)
b. Taking leave obviously involves a broad range of situations, including seeing someone off 
on a journey (which, in China, is an extremely important event). The four options included in this section are acceptable for closing an informal conversation.
1.10 Tones
1.10.1 Tone combos (the ﬁ  rst six)
Tones are easier to perceive and assimilate in pairs. Four tones form sixteen 
possible combinations of two, but because of the previously discussed restric-tion on combinations of low tones (3 + 3 = 2 + 3), only ﬁ  fteen pairs are distinc-tive. The six sets below are mostly comprised of words you have already encountered. They should be memorized so that they can be recited by number (typically as part of warm-up activities at the beginning of class): dì-yī: laˇoshī, 
jı ˇnzhāng; dì-èr: xı ˇzaˇo, hěn ha ˇo, etc.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University64 THE CORE  UNITS
(1) laˇoshī (2) xı ˇzaˇo (3) zàijiàn
jı ˇnzhāng hěn ha ˇo kànbào
(4) bú rè (5) hěn máng (6) bù gāo
bú lèi hěn nán shàngbān
NOTE
hěn nán ‘difﬁ  cult’
Tones in combination tend to accommodate each other to some degree, 
though not to the point of shifting to another tone. In the above sets, the most 
salient adjustment is probably that of 4 + 4 ( zàijiàn), where the tone of the ﬁ  rst 
syllable is not as steeply falling as that of the last. The ﬁ  rst of the two is some-times referred to as the ‘modiﬁ  ed fourth tone’.
1.10.2 Tone lock
In these ﬁ  rst weeks of learning Chinese, you may ﬁ  nd yourself unable to pro-
nounce a tone, even unable to mimic your teacher—a situation that might be called ‘tone lock’. Tone lock can occur for many reasons, but a common one for beginners is that you will often be tentative, and tentativeness in English is accompanied by a rising contour. This is ﬁ  ne if you are trying to say a name, such as Wáng, with rising tone. However, it won’t work if you want to say Wèi, with a falling tone. Other frustrating conditions may occur: you may hear rising as falling, and falling as rising (ﬂ  ip-ﬂ op); your falling tone may refuse to fall 
(‘fear of falling’), your level tone may refuse not to fall (‘fear of ﬂ  ying’). Regard-
less of the symptoms, the best cure is to take a ﬁ  gurative step back and make use of your tone concepts: level is ‘sung out’, rising is ‘doubtful’, low is ‘low’ (despite the contoured symbol), and falling is ‘ﬁ  nal’ or ‘conﬁ  dent’.
1.10.3 The ﬁ  rst ‘rule of three’
If you ﬁ  nd that the tonal cues, ‘sung out’, ‘doubt’, ‘low’, and ‘ﬁ  nal’ do not serve you well, there are others that have been used in the past. Walter C. Hillier, in his 1953 English-Chinese Dictionary (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd.), proposed ‘languid assertion’ for the ﬁ  rst tone, ‘startled surprise’ for the second, 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  1 65
‘affectionate remonstrance’ for the third, and ‘abuse’ for the fourth. Whatever 
the label, the important point is to follow the rule of three: develop a concept for each tone, know what tone each word has, and monitor yourself when you speak.
1. Conceptualize the tones (‘sung out’, etc.).
2. Learn tones with each word (e.g., ha ˇ o has a low tone).3. Monitor your speech.
Read out the following sets (recall your tone concepts).
1.dá da ˇ dā dà 5.bù bu ˇ bú bù
2.koˇu kòu kōu kòu 6.jīn jín jı ˇn jìn
3.pán pàn pān pán 7.guō guoˇguó guò
4.wèi wěi wéi wēi 8.haˇi hái hāi hài
Tone shifts: Read the following sequences aloud, and write the missing 
tones that indicate tone shifts.
 1.bu máng bu è  7.yi tào yi tiáo
 2.bu lèi bu shì  8.yi kuài dì-yi
 3.bu jıˇnzhāng bu kě  9.yi wèi yi zhāng
 4.bu ha ˇo bu cuò 10.yi běn yi kè
 5.hen ha ˇo hen máng 11.hen za ˇo hen wa ˇn
 6.hen lèi hen nán 12.hai ha ˇo hen kě
NOTE
he ˇn waˇ n ‘late’
Learners often feel the tones that are the most difﬁ  cult to distinguish are 
the rising and the low. Here is a discrimination exercise that focuses on these two. In the disyllabic words below, the ﬁ  nal syllables all contain Exercise 3
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University66 THE CORE  UNITS
either a rising tone or a low tone. Have a Chinese speaker read each of 
them to you twice (from the characters); then see if you can correctly iden-tify the missing tone in the pinyin versions of the words.
 1. ፞፾  2. ᄖݣ  3. ࡩฤ  4. ࡍඳ  5. ፞Ꭻ
 6. ሴບ  7. ၗज  8. ੨ۇ  9. ଝ༓ 10. ܹཆ
11. ੓൩ 12. ᒮࢶ 13. ఎᐱ 14. ఎᄿ 15. ࣶ᎜
16. Ⴛๆ 17. ᄖ཭ 18. ᄢᇎ 19. ৩߅ 20. ႈሯ
 1. yīngyong  2. tiāncai  3. dāngnian  4. dàmi  5. Yīngyu
 6. xiàngpi  7. shūfa  8. hēiban  9. jiāqiang  10. bīngqiu
 11. hàoma  12. chóngdie  13. kāizhan  14. kāitou  15. duōyu
 16. sūnnü  17. tiānran  18. tiàowu  19. gòucheng  20. sīxiang
Practice reading out these syllables, all of which contain pinyin o as the 
main vowel.
duō dōu fó kuò
còu zhōu zhuō zoˇu zuò
bó guó ruò shòu gòu shuō suoˇ pó yo ˇu
Read out the following syllables that contain the ui or iu rhymes.
guì shuí ruì chuī zuì duì (wèi)
liú niú xiū qiú diū jiu ˇ (yoˇu)
guı ˇ/jiu ˇ liù/duì cuì/qiú liú/shuí
1.11 Summary
MAIN  PATTERNS
+ Hĕn lèi.
Nĭ lèi ma?     /H208770 Hái hăo.
− Bú tài lèi.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  1 67
+ Hĕn máng.
Nĭ máng bu máng?  /H208770 Hái hăo.
− Bú tài máng.
Nĭ chīfàn le ma? + Chī le.
Nĭ chīfàn le méiyou? − Hái méi ne.
Nĭ chīguo fàn le ma? + Chī/H20855guo/H20856 le.
Nà, jiù zhè yàng ba. Hăo, jiù zhè yàng!
Zhāng lăoshī h ăo. Wáng Jié, zàijiàn.
CONVERSATIONAL  SCENARIOS
GREETINGS → DEVELOPMENT  (QUESTIONS , 
ASSUMPTIONS , COMMENTS  )→ LEAVING
Nĭ h ăo. máng / lèi / rè / jı ˇnzhāng  .  .  . Hăo, zàijiàn, 
míngtiān jiàn.
Wèi lăoshī h ăo. zuótiān / jīntiān / xiànzài  .  .  . Chén lăoshī, zàijiàn.
Zaˇo. xı ˇzaˇo / chīfàn / shàngkè / qı ˇlái  .  .  . Míngtiān jiàn.
hěn / yı ˇjīng / hái méi / yě / bú tài Màn zo ˇu.
Nĭ ne? / Xiaˇo Zhōu ne?
1.12 Rhymes and rhythms
Rote learning, very highly prized in traditional and even modern China, and 
highly valued at other times in our own past, is no longer generally considered a beneﬁ  cial educational method in the West. Outside class, however, people still learn parts for plays and often recall song lyrics, advertising jingles, and slogans without much self-conscious effort. We will take advantage of these predilections by providing some suitable Chinese rhymed and rhythmic mate-rial at the end of each of the core units. This material ranges from doggerel to poetry, from jingles to nursery rhymes, and from satirical verse to songs and 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University68 THE CORE  UNITS
poems. It has been selected for ease of recall, and eventually it will form a 
useful repertoire that can be tapped for information about pronunciation, vocabulary, and grammatical patterns. It also provides something to recite when you are asked to ‘say something in Chinese’ or when you are in China and are asked to sing or perform for an audience. Closer to home, you may be asked to atone for being late to class by reciting some short piece in front of your classmates.
The ﬁ  rst rhyme—a nursery rhyme—tells the story of a young entrepreneur 
and his struggle to set up a business. The word-for-word gloss provided will guide you toward the meaning.
Dà dùzi
Dà dùzi, (‘big tummy’)
kāi pùzi, (‘open shop’)méi běnqián, (‘not+have, root-money’)dàng kùzi. (‘pawn trousers’)
The second—also a nursery rhyme—has a shifting rhythm but a more 
mundane subject matter: the tadpole, denizen of village ponds and urban drain-age systems.
Xiaˇo kēdo ˇu
Xiaˇo kēdo ˇu, (‘small tadpole’)
shuı ˇ lıˇ yóu, (‘water in swim’)
xìxì de wěiba, (‘tiny DE tail’)dàdà de tóu. (‘big DE head’)
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityTHE CHARACTER  UNITS
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityLearning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUnit 8
399ڭ࢒ኝ  DÌ-BA– KÈ
Щ̙ϒĂᐌ֏̙ၿĂ֏̙ၿĂᐌְ̙јă
Míng bú zhèng, zé yán bú shùn, yán bú shùn, zé shì bù chéng.
(‘name not right then speech not clear, speech not clear then things not succeed’)—On the Rectiﬁ  cation of Names, from the Analects of Confucius.
This is the ﬁ  rst of the character lessons, in which you are introduced to the 
Chinese writing system, the form and function of characters, the principles of handwriting, the approach to reading adopted by Learning Chinese, and the characters for numbers, dates, surnames, pronouns, verbs, and enough function words to allow for some readable content. This lesson presupposes familiarity with the material in at least Unit 1.
8.1 General features of Chinese texts8.1.1 Size
Regardless of complexity, characters are uniform in overall size, ﬁ  tting into an imaginary rectangle along the lines indicated in the following example (written with simpliﬁ  ed characters). For this reason, characters are also called fāngkuàizì 
‘squared writing’.
࿟
 ਱ ᄖ ໮ ੪ ེă Shàngha ˇ i tiānqì he ˇn rè.
8.1.2 SpacingCompare the character and pinyin versions of the sentence above: though the convention is not always consistently followed, pinyin places spaces between 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University400 THE CHARACTER  UNITS
words rather than syllables. Characters, however, are evenly spaced, regardless 
of word boundaries.
8.1.3 Punctuation
Modern Chinese writing makes use of punctuation conventions that are similar in form to those of English, though not always identical in function.
Periods, full stops: Ą/ .The former is traditionally used, but the latter  is becoming more common.
Commas: , / ă
The latter is commonly used in lists separating  enumerated items.
Quotes: Ķ!/!/!/!ķ0! ‘ . . . ’ / “ . . . ”
The ﬁ  rst type is traditionally used, but the  others are also common.
Proper names: There is nothing comparable to a capital letter 
 in Chinese. Proper names are usually  unmarked, though, occasionally, they are  indicated by a wavy underline.
Other punctuation will be noted as it is encountered.
8.1.4 DirectionTraditionally, Chinese has been written and read from top to bottom and from right to left. Major writing reforms instituted in the PRC during the 1950s not only formalized a set of simpliﬁ  ed characters, but required them to be written horizontally, from left to right, like modern European languages. As a result, Chinese texts now come in two basic formats. Material originating in Taiwan and traditional overseas communities, or on the Mainland prior to the reforms, is written with traditional characters that are, with a few exceptions such as in headlines and on forms, arranged in vertical columns and read from right to 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  8 401
left. Material originating in the Mainland, in Singapore, and in some overseas 
communities subsequent to the reforms of the 1950s is written with simpliﬁ  ed 
characters arranged in horizontal rows and read from left to right, just like English and countless other languages.
A number of other writing systems originally adopted the Chinese conven-
tion of vertical writing, though most of these have also since shifted to a pri-marily horizontal conﬁ  guration. Japanese writing remains vertical for the most part. Korean shifted to mostly horizontal a few decades ago. The Classical Mongolian script, still seen on some of the buildings in the National Palace Museum in Beijing and elsewhere, was written vertically on the Chinese model, but with columns moving left to right, not right to left. Nowadays, Mongolian is mostly written in the Cyrillic (Russian) script, horizontally and left to right.
8.2 The form of characters
Characters are the primary unit for writing Chinese. Just as English letters 
have several forms (such as g/g and a/a) and styles (such as italic and bold), Chinese characters also have various realizations. Some styles that developed in early historical periods survive to this day in special functions. For example, the Chinese traditionally use ink impressions made by seals or ‘chops’, mostly square-shaped and made from various types of stone, in lieu of signa-tures on documents and items of value. The names and other characters on such seals are usually, even now, inscribed in a version of the character script known as the ‘seal script’ (zhuànshū), ﬁ  rst developed during the Qin dynasty (3rd century 
BCE). Other scripts include the ‘grass script’ (ca ˇ oshū) and the 
‘running script’ (xíngshū), impressionistic versions of the standard script that are still used in handwriting and art. As in other scripts, advertisers and designers may also modify the look of characters in a variety of different ways for their own purposes. Putting such variants aside, it is estimated that the number of distinct characters appearing in modern texts is between 6,000 and 7,000. Fortunately, about half that number will sufﬁ  ce to read most 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University402 THE CHARACTER  UNITS
modern material, such as newspapers, academic writing, and popular novels. 
High total numbers of characters are to be found in the most comprehensive dictionaries, but these numbers are inﬂ  ated by archaic characters and variants.
8.2.1 Radicals and phonetics
There are certain ameliorating factors that make the Chinese writing system more learnable than it might otherwise seem to be. One of the most signiﬁ  cant 
is the fact that many characters have common constituents. Between two-thirds and three-quarters of common characters (cf. DeFrancis 1984, p. 110 and passim) consist of two elements, both of which can often also stand alone as characters in their own right. Historically, these elements were selected either for their sounds (hence the term ‘phonetic elements’, or simply ‘phonetics’), or for their meanings (making them semantic elements, commonly called ‘radicals’). Thus, Ԟ wàng ‘to forget’ contains ˸ wáng as a phonetic element 
and ͕!‘heart’ as a radical; ᄬ yu ˇ ‘language’ is composed of Ӎ wú and ֏!
‘language’. The signiﬁ  cance of phonetics and radicals will be discussed in a later section. For now, it is enough to know that a few hundred simple graphs are the building blocks for a large number of compound graphs: for example, ˸ appears in ѓ and ڣ ; ͕ in Ԡ and م ; ֏ in ᔁ and ᄲ; Ӎ in ु 
and ୏. These ‘root’ graphs number in the high hundreds, and familiarity 
with them allows many characters to be learned as a pairing of higher-order constituents (such as ᒦ + ቦ*- rather than just a complex composite of 
strokes (ᒨ).
8.2.2 Simpliﬁ  ed characters
As noted in the introduction, Chinese policy makers tried to make the writing 
system easier to learn by introducing the Chinese equivalent of spelling reform, i.e., reducing the number of strokes in complicated characters. Thus, ઼ becomes ਪ and ᙝ becomes ܟ ,with the simpliﬁ  ed version generally modeled 
on variants that had long been current in handwriting or calligraphy, but not in print. The two sets of characters are usually referred to in English as 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  8 403
‘traditional’ and ‘simpliﬁ  ed’, and in Chinese as fántı ˇ zì (‘complicated-body-
characters’) and jia ˇ ntı ˇ zì (‘simple-body-characters’).
For you, the learner, this simpliﬁ  cation is a mixed blessing; while it ostensi-
bly made writing characters simpler, it also made characters less redundant for reading. For example, ሄ and ڌ‘( music’ and ‘east’, respectively) are quite distinct as traditional characters, but their simpliﬁ  ed versions—ಘ and ࣁ—are 
easier to confuse.
As noted in the Introduction, jia ˇ ntı ˇ zì and fántı ˇ zì should not be thought of as 
two distinct writing systems; many characters retain only one form (ጐ ye ˇ, ੪ 
he ˇ n, ੑ ha ˇ o), and of those that have two forms, the vast majority exhibit only 
minor differences: ႁ / ᄲ, भ / ฺ/ There are perhaps only three dozen relatively 
common characters with quite divergent forms, such as ᑚ / ఺ and ൰ / ෴. Careful inspection reveals that even these characters often have elements in common. For native Chinese readers, the two systems represent only a minor inconvenience, on par with the discrepancies between capital and lowercase letters in the Roman alphabet (though, admittedly, on a larger scale). Generally, learners focus on one system for writing, but soon get used to reading in both. In this text, both sets are introduced, but most of the readings are based on the simpliﬁ  ed set that is standard for the 1.3 billion people on the Mainland. In 
most major sections of the character lessons, there is at least one sample text or exercise written in traditional characters.
8.3 The function of characters
As noted in the Introduction, Chinese uses a system of writing that employs 
complex symbols (characters) to represent syllables of particular words, or syl-lables that constitute parts of particular words. For this reason, it is difﬁ  cult to 
use Chinese characters to transcribe foreign names: ‘Italy’ can be incorporated into Chinese as Yìdàlì and written ຍ̂Ӏ, but the usual meaning of the char-acters, ‘meaning-be big-beneﬁ  t’ can only be dimmed by context, not completely suppressed.
In Chinese, different words with identical sounds (homophones) will usually 
be written with different characters.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University404 THE CHARACTER  UNITS
sound jīn
meaning ‘today’ ‘metal’
character ங! ஘
Such homophony is common in Chinese at the syllable level (as illustrated 
in the shi story, described in the Introduction). Here, for example, are common 
words or word parts that are all pronounced shì:
 shì
ߏ‘ to be’ ְ‘ thing’   ވ‘ room’   ၂ ‘test’
Except for certain high-frequency words (such as ဵ shì ‘to be’), words in 
Mandarin are usually compound, consisting of several syllables: ူ༽ shìqing 
‘things’; ୴၀ jiàoshì ‘classroom’; ఠ၂ ka ˇ oshì ‘examination’. At the level 
of words or compound words, homophony is relatively rare. In Chinese language word processing with pinyin input, typing ‘shiqing’ and ‘kaoshi’ (most input systems do not require tones) will elicit only a few options; and since most word-processing software organizes options by frequency, this usually means that the correct characters for shìqing and ka ˇ oshì will often be produced on the ﬁ rst try.
 shì
shìqing jiàoshì ka ˇ oshì
‘thing’ ‘classroom’ ‘test’ְଐ! ୴၀! ҂၂
8.4 Writing
As noted in the Introduction, one of the most important pedagogical functions 
of learning to write Chinese characters is that it draws your attention to detail. 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  8 405
Characters are often distinguished by no more than a single stroke, or just a 
change in the orientation of a single stroke.
4 strokes: ᄖᕄ ० འ ვ
tiāny āof ū qua ˇ n tài
‘sky’ ‘goblin’ ‘person’ ‘dog’ ‘grand’
5 strokes: ڹ࿺ ᄙ ଡ ᎅ
bái shēn tián jia ˇ yóu
‘white’ ‘to explain’ ‘ﬁ  eld’ ‘A’ ‘from’
For the learner, there are also aesthetic and practical reasons for being able 
to write characters, over and above the contribution that writing makes to reading. Reasonable goals at the beginning level are to learn the principles of writing so that any character can be reproduced by copying, and to learn to write from memory a selection of representative graphs that can serve as the basis for future calligraphic endeavors.
8.4.1 Principles of drawing characters
There are many good websites that deal with the writing of Chinese characters. Some not only present the general principles of writing, but also allow the viewer to select characters and watch them drawn in animation, stroke by stroke. In this section, we will try to sketch out the basic principles of writing Chinese characters without using special graphics or non-text insertions and leave readers to browse the specialized websites for additional helpful informa-tion. (Cf. for example, yellowbridge.com, and the useful links listed in the appropriate sections of the Chinese Language Teachers Association website: clta-us.org.)
Calligraphic strokes are called bı ˇ huà/H20855r/H20856 in Chinese. Strokes are drawn with a 
more or less ﬁ  xed order and direction that are ultimately derived from calli-graphic practices. This stroke order (bı ˇ shùn) is considered important for both aesthetic and pedagogical reasons. Characters tend to look awkward if not drawn with the conventional order of strokes; and following the prescribed 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University406 THE CHARACTER  UNITS
stroke order develops a tactile memory for characters that can act in support of 
visual memory.
A. FORM  Characters are usually said to be formed from eight basic strokes, 
but because two of the ‘basic’ strokes’ only appear appended to others (without the writing implement being lifted from the surface), they should really be regarded as basic components of strokes rather than actual strokes. All eight are illustrated below, with the names of each given on the far left. It is useful to be able to describe how a character is written by naming its strokes: héng + 
shù ‘horizontal + vertical’ for လ, pie ˇ  + nà ‘slanting down to the left + slanting 
down to the right’ for ཽ. Chinese children often do this when they are learning to write, and we will do the same below when the general principles of stroke order are discussed.
To keep the presentation as clear as possible, the principles of drawing are 
illustrated by relatively simple characters. In most cases, it should be easy to identify the stroke in question.
The unitary strokes
NAME  AND MEANING DESCRIPTION EXAMPLES  IN CHARACTERS
dia ˇ n ‘dot’ a very short stroke !!!ቃ  ེ
héng ‘horizontal’ a horizontal stroke !!!ྯ  ࡍ
shù ‘vertical’ a vertical stroke !!!လ  ᒦ
pie ˇ ‘cast aside’ a stroke that slopes 
downwards to the 
left!!!ཽ  ོ
nà ‘press down’ a stroke that slopes 
downwards to the right!!!ཽ  ߛ
tí ‘raise’ a stroke that rises from 
left to right!!!ࡌ  ੈ
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  8 407
Extensions with gōu ‘hook’ and zhé ‘bend’
NAME  AND MEANING DESCRIPTION EXAMPLES  IN CHARACTERS
hénggōu ‘horiz. + 
hook’a horizontal stroke 
ending in a down-
wards hook!!!་  ൰
shùgōu ‘vert. + hook’ a vertical stroke ending 
in a leftwards hook!!!̈  ၺ
xiégōu ‘slanted + 
hook’a stroke that slants 
downwards to the right and ends in a upwards hook!!!ွ  ়
héngzhé ‘horiz. + 
bend’a stroke that begins 
horizontal then bends to near vertical!!!ᦤ  ၗ
shùzhé ‘vert. + bend’ an ‘L’ shaped stroke !!!ီ  ቹ
NOTES
a. The stroke xiégōu ‘slant + hook’ is always so called even though nàgōu ‘slanting down to the 
right + hook’ also looks like a reasonable name for it.
b. Sometimes a subcategory of the pie ˇ  stroke, dua ˇ npie ˇ  ‘short + slanting down to the left’, is 
included in the list of basic strokes. Examples would be the top stroke of ໻!or the top-left 
stroke of!ᇍ . Otherwise, these strokes are simply pie ˇ .
c. There are in fact some miscellaneous strokes that cannot be usefully analyzed in terms of the eight basics, e.g. wāngōu ‘curved + hook’, that appears, for example, on the left-hand side of the character ১.
d. It is also quite common to combine three stroke components into a single stroke. The 
bottom stroke of ၗ (shown above) consists of ‘héngzhé + gōu’, i.e. ‘horizontal with bend + 
hook’. In fact, in terms of frequency, bent strokes are more common with a ﬁ  nal hook than 
without; cf. ए
, ጐ, ࢫ.
B. DIRECTION  In most cases, strokes are falling or horizontal, and left to right. 
Only one of the six unitary strokes rises—the one called tí (seen in the 
lower-left strokes of the two sample characters, ࡌ and ੈ); only one ﬂ  ows 
leftwards—pie ˇ .
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University408 THE CHARACTER  UNITS
C. ORDER  Though some useful generalizations can be made about the order-
ing of strokes within a character, it is not possible to reduce stroke order to a 
set of rules that would allow you to predict how to write any character. What the general principles listed below will allow you to do is make sense of the order and more easily recall the order once you have learned it. (Note that stroke direction and stroke order for individual characters are illustrated in Appendix 1.)
1. Left before right, top before bottom, top left to bottom right:
ڭ bā!‘eight’ piě, nà
ᆪ wén ‘design’ dia ˇ n, héng, pie ˇ, nà
࢐ dì ‘place’ ᅉ (slanted) then ጐ
ྯ sān ‘three’ (upper) héng, (middle) héng, (lower) héng
૜ huo ˇ ‘ﬁ re’ dia ˇ n, pie ˇ, (dua ˇ n)pie ˇ , nà
ᐁ za ˇ o ‘be early’ Ꮥ then လ
2. Héng ‘horizontal’ before shù ‘vertical’, except héng as a ﬁ  nal base stroke is 
held until after the vertical:
Ȉ shí ‘ten’ héng, shù
० fū ‘person’ héng, héng, piě, nà
But: ᅉ tu ˇ ‘soil’ héng, shù, héng
And: ᅽ wáng ‘king’ héng, héng, shù, héng
3. Squares are drawn in three strokes, beginning with shù
 at the left, continu-
ing with a héng zhé ‘horizontal + bend’ (sometimes ending in a hook), and closing with a bottom héng. (However, for innards, cf. number 4.)
ా ko ˇ u ‘mouth’ shù, héngzhé, héng
4. Outer before inner, except that the stroke closing a rectangle is drawn last, 
after the innards are ﬁ  lled:
͡ yuè ‘moon;  month’pie ˇ, héngzhégōu, (top) héng, 
 (bottom) héng
ᆰ wèn ‘ask’ ඡ ﬁ rst, then ా
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  8 409
But: ྇ rì ‘sun; day’ shù, héngzhégōu, (middle) 
 héng, (bottom) héng
And: ႐ sì ‘four’ shù, héngzhégōu, pie ˇ, nà, héng
5. Dominant strokes or components may override the left-to-right tendency.
ቃ xia ˇ o ‘small’ shù, (left) dia ˇ n, (right) dia ˇ n
ာ shì ‘show’ héng, héng, shùgōu, (left) dia ˇ n, (right) dia ˇ n
ධ mí ‘enchanted’ ඳ then ᨙ
6. With dia ˇ n strokes (‘dots’), an upper left-hand dia ˇ n tends to be the ﬁ  rst stroke 
of the character, and an upper right or inside dia ˇ n tends to be the last stroke of 
the character. Both cases conform to the general left-to-right order of strokes.
First: ᆐ wèi ‘for’ diaˇn, piě, héngzhégōu, dia ˇ n
ጠ yī ‘clothes’ diaˇn, héng, piě, shùgōu, piě, nà
Last: Ꭽ yù ‘jade’ héng, héng, shù, héng, dia ˇn
় gē ‘spear’ héng, xiégōu, piě, diaˇn
8.5 Presentation of characters
The reading and writing lessons in Learning Chinese
 are organized on the 
general principle that characters are best learned by encountering them many 
times in texts rather than in lists. Before characters can be read, however, they need to be recognized; and to be recognized, key features need to be noticed. In these lessons, characters are introduced in a large size, with information about number of strokes, pronunciation, general meaning, and form. This information is intended to give the characters some individuality and provide traction for the reading process. Sometimes, knowledge about the actual history of the character may account for, and therefore help to remember, its form. In other cases, the actual history of the character may be less helpful than a fanci-ful account. The notes that follow the introduction of each set of characters contain both actual and fanciful etymologies. Students, in any case, often make up their own stories to account for the form of characters. What is important is to ﬁ  nd a way to link the shape of the character to the word it represents so that reading can proceed.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University410 THE CHARACTER  UNITS
In the later sections of this lesson, and in other lessons, readings begin with 
words and phrases (with pinyin conﬁ  rmation), then continue with short inter-
actions, longer dialogues, and, when possible, narratives and stories. Once you ﬁ nd that you can read the material with conﬁ  dence, you can consolidate by 
learning to write the graphs. Focusing on individual graphs will draw your attention to slight differences and prepare you for encountering new combinations.
NOTES
a. Since most words in Mandarin are compounds (of two or more syllables), characters gener-
ally represent parts of compounds rather than words as such. Sometimes combinational or historical information can suggest a general meaning for a single character in a compound: ීᄖ ‘bright’ + ‘day’ for míngtiān ‘tomorrow’. In cases where a particular character has no independent existence outside a compound, it may not be possible to give it a reliable meaning: ᔦᄖ zuótiān ‘(? + day) yesterday’. (The same problems exists for the English word ‘yesterday’, 
which combines the word ‘day’ with the non-word ‘yester’.) In such cases, if a general meaning can be inferred from other combinations, it will be placed in parentheses.
b. For characters with two forms, simpliﬁ  ed and traditional, both forms are given, with the 
traditional form above the simpliﬁ  ed. The reason for this order is that the simpliﬁ  ed generally 
derives from the traditional. Once past the initial introduction, however, the focus is more on the simpliﬁ  ed set, and when both are cited, simpliﬁ  ed precedes traditional.
c. The order and direction of strokes for individual characters are provided in Appendix 1.d. It is not crucial to know which radical a particular graph is classiﬁ  ed under, but it is useful 
to recognize the most common radicals. The system of paired numbers written beneath the large-format characters that provide the introduction to each set is a practical way of doing this. The ﬁ  rst number represents the number of strokes for the character’s radical. The second number represents the number of remaining strokes in the character. (Traditionally, Chinese dictionaries are organized in this way, ﬁ  rst by radical, then by number of strokes.) The sum of these two numbers is the total number of strokes for the character. When the second number is zero (as for ޠ 4 + 0 / ܜ 8 + 0), the character is itself a radical. In some cases, characters that have only one form have been assigned a different radical in the simpliﬁ  ed set 
from that of the traditional; for example, ԙ dì ‘younger brother’, for which there is no 
traditional-simpliﬁ  ed distinction, is assigned the radical ̕ in the traditional set (3 + 4), but ˣ 
in the simpliﬁ  ed set (2 + 5). In such cases, both numbers are given, with the traditional radical assignment ﬁ  rst.
For the majority of cases, the numbering method makes it clear which element is the radical. 
However, when the radical is obscure, or the number of strokes for the radical happens to 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  8 411
equal the number of strokes that remain (as is the case for ‘six’ below—2 + 2), the numbers 
will not indicate the radical with certainty. Knowing the radical assigned to a character was more important when dictionaries were organized by radical rather than pronunciation, as they tend to be now. Nowadays, it is enough to know the more common radicals, and the numerical system used herein will sufﬁ  ce to bring those to light.
e. Traditional characters would normally be written vertically, but for reasons of practicality, they too are presented in horizontal format herein.
f. Occasionally, new characters which have not been formally introduced in the character 
lessons are included in texts on the assumption that they can be identiﬁ  ed from the context. 
Such material is underlined. When context is insufﬁ  cient, new material is glossed in notes that follow.
g. As noted in the Introduction, a sensible policy toward the two character sets is to read both 
but write simpliﬁ  ed.
SUMMARY  Scan the large-format characters and the analysis and notes that 
follow to try to ﬁ  nd a connection between each character and the word that it 
represents.
Remind yourself of the words and phrases that contain the new characters 
by covering up the pinyin with a pencil and reading the phrases section (§8.12.1). Then uncover the pinyin and check.
Making use of context, do the readings until you have a clear comprehension 
of the passage while reading it aloud.
Finally, complete the exercises, practice writing the characters until familiar, 
and review.
8.6 Numbers
˘˟ˬα̣
1 + 02  + 01  + 23  + 21  + 3
yī èr sāns ì w uˇ
̱˛ˣ˝Ȉ
2 + 21  + 12  + 01  + 12  + 0
liù qī bā jiu ˇ shí
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University412 THE CHARACTER  UNITS
NOTES
The characters for ‘one’, ‘two’, and ‘three’ are obviously representational. The near left-right 
symmetry of the characters for ‘four’, ‘six’, ‘eight’, and ‘ten’ is not entirely coincidental. ႐ seems to have represented a whole easily divided into two parts; an earlier form of ങ looked very much like that of ႐ (with the two lower ‘legs’ of ങ matching the two inner strokes of ႐). ڭ( distinguished from ཽ rén ‘person’ and ྜྷ rù ‘enter’) is also said to have represented 
the notion of division (into two groups of four); and လ represented a unity of the four cardinal directions with the center. Smaller multiples of ten are occasionally represented as unit char-acters, especially where space is at a premium: ᔷ! ‘twenty’ and ❞! ‘thirty’. However, they are 
still read as if written ˟Ȉ and ˬȈ.
Exercise 1
Practice reading the Chinese multiplication table.
Practice reading the Chinese multiplication table.
The Chinese multiplication table is often called jiu ˇ jiu ˇ  chéngfa ˇ bia ˇ o ( ோோ
߇ज!*ܭ‘ nine nines multiplication table’ or the jiu ˇ jiu ˇ  koˇ ujué (ோோా௽) 
‘nine nines rhyme’ because in its traditional form it began with the nine-
times table and descended to the one. Though nowadays it is usually recited upwards from one, it keeps another important feature of the tradi-tional system in always reciting the smaller operand ﬁ  rst: 3 × 7, never 7 × 
3. In other words, the Chinese table has only half the entries of the standard American-British table. The six through nine-times tables given below illustrate. Note that when the product is only a single digit, the rhythm is preserved by adding ଀ dé ‘gets’; for similar reasons, the teens 
are often recited as yīshí’èr, etc., rather than just shí’èr.
̱! ˛! ˣ! ˝
˘̱଀̱! ˘˛଀˛! ˘ˣ଀ˣ! ˘˝଀˝˟̱˘Ȉ˟! ˟˛˘Ȉα! ˟ˣ˘Ȉ̱! ˟˝˘Ȉˣˬ̱˘Ȉˣ! ˬ˛˟Ȉ˘! ˬˣ˟Ȉα! ˬ˝˟Ȉ˛α̱˟Ȉα! α˛˟Ȉˣ! αˣˬȈ˟! α˝ˬȈ̱̣̱ˬȈ! ̣˛ˬỊ̏! ̣ˣαȈ! ̣˝αỊ̱̱̏ˬȈ̱! ̱˛αȈ˟! ̱ˣαȈˣ! ̱˝̣Ȉα
 ˛˛αȈ˝! ˛ˣ̣Ȉ̱! ˛˝̱Ȉˬ
  ˣˣ̱Ȉα! ˣ˝˛Ȉ˟
   ˝˝ˣȈ˘
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  8 413
Practice reading telephone numbers.
Although telephone numbers are often written out in Arabic numerals 
on business cards, they do appear as characters in other contexts, with the 
exception of líng ‘zero’, which is more often written ‘O’. Practice reading the following until you can do so ﬂ  uently, with a good rhythm. Recall that, in the Mainland, ‘one’ in telephone numbers (as well as in other kinds of lists) is usually pronounced yāo rather than yī.
࢟જ / ࿪ྖ  ၄૦ / ፟͘
diànhuà ‘telephone’ sho ˇ ujī ‘mobile phone’
(1) ങᇋோങ औோጙ!ڭ ጙྯᇋ O ጙ໕ᇋ ጙ႐႐ྯ
(2) ႐औ໕ோ ோ႐ጙᇋ! ጙྯோ ྯങऔோ ങோങ႐
(3) ᇋ႐औ໕ ோ႐ጙᇋ! ጙྯோ औOྯڭ ᇋڭڭऔ
(4) ᇋጙങڭ ໕औጙோ! ጙྯO औ႐ങ໕ ோோڭᇋ
(5) ڭऔऔO ໕႐औങ! ጙྯᇋ ጙ႐႐ྯ ങ႐ڭڭ
(6) औྯڭ໕ औ໕ങऔ! Oऔோ औങങྯ ႐ጙOோ
8.7 Dates
In Unit 1, you learned the components of dates: nián ‘year’, yuè ‘month’, and 
rì/hào ‘day’. It was also noted that dates, though spoken with hào, are usually written with rì ‘sun; day’.
ѐ͟͡ (੓/ཱི)
1 + 54  + 04  + 0 (3 + 2) (6 + 7)
nián yuè rì hào
‘year’ ‘month’ ‘day’ ‘date’
NOTE
The characters used for yuè and rì are representational, being squared-off versions of what were 
originally drawings of the moon and sun, respectively. On the other hand, nián is not obviously representational, so you might need to construct a made-up etymology for it, such as: ‘A year 
contains four seasons; the ﬁ  rst stroke (pie ˇ ) stands for the winter, the three horizontal strokes 
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University414 THE CHARACTER  UNITS
(héng) are the growing and harvesting seasons (spring, summer, and autumn); the short fourth 
stroke (dia ˇ n) marks the harvest, and the long vertical stroke (shù) represents the continuity of the year.’ However, note that the short dia ˇ n stroke on the third horizontal is drawn before the lowest horizontal, presumably following the stroke order principle of ‘closing stroke last’. ੓/ཱིhào is placed in parentheses because it does not usually appear in written dates; its traditional form has Ọ ‘tiger’ as radical.
Dates are frequently written using Arabic numerals, as in these examples, 
which could be taken from the banners of Mainland newspapers.
1999ฤ7Ꮬ26྇
2002ฤ2Ꮬ11྇1998ฤ5Ꮬ7྇
Interestingly, the traditional, ‘lunar calendar’ dates are often written out in 
full, with the numbers also represented by characters. The Chinese lunar cal-endar consists of 12 months of 29 to 30 days, plus intercalary months inserted every few years to make up the difference. The lunar New Year usually begins several weeks after the solar New Year. Lunar years are counted in cycles of 60, which accounts for all possible combinations of a set of 10 ‘stems’ and 12 ‘branches’ (i.e., 1–1, 1–2 . . . 1–11, 1–12, 2–1 . . . 10–12, etc.). Though the ﬁ  rst lunar 
month has a special name (zhèngyuè), the rest are all written with number + yuè, just like the solar calendar months; rì is usually left out of lunar dates. The correspondence is as follows:
International dating: 1999ฤ7Ꮬ26྇Traditional Chinese: ଄ඊฤ໕Ꮬ!औလങ
 jı ˇ maˇ o
Most newspaper banners give dates in both forms. Even in traditional dates, 
líng ‘zero’ is usually written as 0 rather than with its complicated character ഃ.
Exercise 2
The following are all signiﬁ  cant dates in Chinese history. Practice reading them aloud, and see if you can discover (or recall) the event that took place on each date.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  8 415
ጙோ႐ோฤ! လᏜ! ጙ྇! ጙோऔጙฤ! ໕Ꮬ! ጙ྇
ጙோጙோฤ! ᇋᏜ! ႐྇! ጙோڭோฤ! ങᏜ! ႐྇ጙோ႐ᇋฤ! ڭᏜ! လᇋ྇! ጙோጙጙฤ! လᏜ! လ྇
In the spaces provided, write the following dates in Chinese.
November 23, 1949April 18, 2003February 15, 1994October 19, 2001
8.8 Days
̫͇ ߑ͇ ځ͇
2 + 21  + 34  + 54  + 4
jīntiān zuótiān míngtiān
‘today’ ‘yesterday’ ‘tomorrow’
NOTES
a. It is useful to distinguish simplex (non-compound) characters from compound. The latter 
contain parts that can themselves be characters: for example, ځ míng ‘bright’ is composed of 
the two graphs྇! rì ‘sun; day’ and Ꮬyuè ‘moon; month’. While more common characters are 
often simplex, the vast majority are compound. The form of simplex graphs can often be clas-siﬁ ed as representational and thereby rationalized by a non-linguistic reference (e.g., ྇ origi-
nated as a representation of the sun and Ꮬ of the moon). Graphic elements are compounded, however, not to form new representations, but to combine linguistic elements of sound (phonetics) and meaning (radicals).
b. ͇ tiān has the root meaning of ‘sky; day’, and it is said to be based on a drawing that rep-
resented the sky above Earth. ځ míng is composed of the characters for ‘sun’ and ‘moon’, and 
appears in compounds with the meaning ‘bright’ (cf. ‘a bright tomorrow’). ߑ zuó is also a 
compound, combining the radical ྇ rì ‘sun’ with the phonetic ᐟ zhà.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University416 THE CHARACTER  UNITS
The list of days and dates below is out of order. Read the entries in numeri-
cal order, beginning with the numbers on the left. Though you would normally read the day out as rì, once you have read it, you can pass it on as information with hào: “Dì-yī, míngtiān wu ˇyuè shí rì (or shí hào).”
˛;! ̫͇! α͡! ˟Ȉ͟ˬ;! ߑ͇! ˝͡! Ȉˣ̱͟;! ځ͇! ˬ͡! α͟˟;! ߑ͇! Ȉ˟͡! Ȉ˛͟˝;! ̫͇! ˣ͡! ˟͟˘;! ځ͇! ̣͡! Ȉ͟α;! ̫͇! ˝͡! ˟Ị̣̏͟;! ځ͇! Ȉ˘͡! ˬȈ͟ˣ;! ߑ͇! ̱͡! Ȉα͟
Ȉ;! ̫͇! ˟͡! ˝͟
8.9 Surnames and pronouns
ͳ! Ղ! ͨ! !׹ Ϩ! ڒ
4 + 0 4 + 3 4 + 0 2 + 6 5 + 0 4 + 4
wáng lı ˇ máo zhōu bái lín
‘king’ ‘plum’ ‘ﬁ  ne hair’ ‘circle’ ‘white’ ‘woods’
As shown, the characters that represent surnames also represent words with 
other meanings.
!ؖ с! ΁! ˵
3 + 5 3 + 3 2 + 3 1 + 2
xìng tā tā ye ˇ
‘surname/H20855d/H20856’ ‘she; her’ ‘he; him’ ‘also; too’Exercise 3
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  8 417
NOTE
ؖ xìng ‘surname/H20855d/H20856’ and с tā ‘she; her’ both have ̃ nüˇ ‘female’ as a radical. (Early forms of 
̃ are said to depict a woman crouching or kneeling.) In ؖ , ̃ is combined with Ϡ shēng ‘to 
be born’, suggesting a notion such as ‘children are born of women and given a surname’. с 
was created in relatively recent times as a counterpart to ΁ (a contrast not represented in the 
spoken language). The right element of ΁ and с was originally distinct from the graph ˵, used to write the word ye ˇ  ‘also; too’. The modern identity is fortuitous, probably a result of 
scribal confusion, and causes confusion for students of the language. You will need to pay special attention to the characters ΁, с, and ˵/
Read the following sentences aloud (paying attention to tones), beginning 
with ‘one’ (and citing the number).
ˬ! сؖͨĄ! ˛! ΁˵׹ؖĄ̣! ΁ؖՂĄ! ˟! сؖͳĄ˘! сؖϨĄ! Ȉ! с˵ؖϨĄˣ! ΁˵ڒؖĄ! α! сڒؖĄ˝! с˵ؖͨĄ! ̱! ΁׹ؖĄ
The following list is out of numerical order. Read it in order, and read out the surname and birthday (shēngrì), along the following lines.
“Dì-yī ge: /H20855Tā/H20856 xìng Wáng; /H20855shēngrì ne:/H20856 y ījiu ˇ bā’èr nián, yīyuè sì 
rì (or hào)”
̱Ĉ! ͳć1946ѐ8͡23͟ˣĈ! Ղć1981ѐ6͡8͟ˬĈ! ͨć1979ѐ10͡29͟˝Ĉ! ׹ć1966ѐ2͡30͟ȈĈ! Ϩć1961ѐ10͡2͟Ȉ˘Ĉ! ڒć1942ѐ8͡17͟˟Ĉ! ͨć1983ѐ4͡14͟˘Ĉ! ͳć1982ѐ1͡4͟Ȉ˟Ĉ! ׹ć1976ѐ11͡21͟Exercise 4
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University418 THE CHARACTER  UNITS
8.10 More pronouns and function words
ԧ! Ұ! !ࣇ ̙! ๜! ׸
4 + 3 or 1 + 6 2 + 5 2 + 8 1 + 3 3 + 9 3 + 5
  ඣ!  ൮!
  2 + 3  3 + 3 
wo ˇ nı ˇ men bù ma ne
‘I; me’ ‘you’ COLLECTIVE NEG Q NE
NOTES
a. ᆸ , ฝ, and ඣ/ࣇ ,like the other graphs used for pronouns (Ⴧ and ჉) are compound, 
though only one of the parts of ᆸ can still be represented independently in the modern lan-
guage—the right element is the graph ় gē ‘spear’ (looking more like a harpoon with its barbed 
tip down). Both ฝ and ඣ/ࣇ have a left element that is a vertical version of the graph ཽ ‘person’, known as rénzìpáng ‘person at the side’ (or the ‘person radical’). The right elements, ऑ and ඡ/ܝ ,respectively, also appear independently (cf. next item).
b. ඣ/ࣇ consists of the person radical plus ඡ/ܝ mén ‘door’, which is phonetic. ඡ/ܝ was 
originally a representation of a door with two leaves.c. The graph ̙, said to derive from a drawing of a bird, was borrowed to write bù not because 
of its form, but because of similarity of sound. A made-up etymology: ‘̙ represents an arrow 
being shot at the ceiling—but not managing to pass through’.
d. The set in §8.10 is the ﬁ  rst to include graphs that have both simpliﬁ  ed and traditional forms: 
ඣ/ࣇ and ൮/๜. The simpliﬁ  ed graphs are both based on traditional calligraphic forms, and they retain a holistic resemblance to the traditional form, even though the two share only a few strokes in common.αĈ! Ϩć1959ѐ9͡21͟
˛Ĉ! ڒć1967ѐ3͡16̣͟Ĉ! Ղć1951ѐ11͡7͟
Use the data in the previous table as the basis for a conversation along the following lines.
Cue: Dì-yī ge ne?
Response: Dì-yī ge: Xìng Wáng; shēngrì: yījiu ˇ bā’èr nián, yīyuè sì hào.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  8 419
e. ൮/๜ contains the graph ൫/੺ ma ˇ ‘horse’ (originally a drawing of a horse) as a phonetic 
(in other words, used to indicate the similarity of its sound). The addition of ˾ ko ˇ u ‘mouth; 
entrance’ (but here suggesting ‘colloquial’) removes any ambiguity.  Cf. ൦/๽ mā, the informal 
word for ‘mother’, which also makes use of ൫/੺ as a phonetic with the graph ̃ ‘woman; 
female’ to disambiguate.
8.10.1 Reading
1. Ⴧቷᅽă!ᆸጐቷᅽă
2. ฝጐቷඇ൮Ǜ!0!ݙǈᆸቷᅽă
3. Ⴧቷರ൮Ǜ!0!ݙǈჇቷ೶ă
4. ᆸቷᅽǈჇቷ೶ǈฝฒǛ
5. ᆸቷᒲǈჇቷ೶ǈฝቷᅽă
6. ᆸቷᅽǈ჉ቷڹǈฝฒǛ
7. ᆸቷᒲǈ!჉ቷ೶ǈฝቷڹ൮Ǜ
8. ݙǈᆸቷ೶ǈฝቷڹ൮Ǜ
9. ฝඣฒǛჇඣฒǛ0!ᆸቷᒲǈჇඣ!ฒǖჇቷڹǈჇቷರǈ჉ቷ೶ă
8.11 SVs and associated function words
р! ௢! ѓ! ዴ! ҽ
3 + 3 5 + 6 3 + 3 8 + 7 2 + 5
   ऌ!
   3 + 7 
ha ˇo lèi máng è le ˇ ng
‘to be good’ ‘tired’ ‘busy’ ‘hungry’ ‘cold’
!ޝ ᔘ! ሤ! ͉! ˞
3 + 6 3 + 13 4 + 11 3 + 1 1 + 1
 થ ེ!  
 3 + 4 4 + 6  
he ˇn hái rè tài le
‘very’ ‘still’ ‘hot’ ‘too; very’ LE
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University420 THE CHARACTER  UNITS
NOTES
a. SVs: р is composed of the female radical ̃ and ̄ zı ˇ ‘child’ (the latter without a phonetic 
function), often explained as the paradigm of a ‘good relationship’. ௢ includes ϣ tián ‘ﬁ  eld’ 
above and the radical derived from the graph for ‘silk’ below: ‘a heavy and tiring burden for 
such a slender base’. ѓ combines the ‘heart radical’ (an elongated and truncated version of ͕) and ˸ wáng as a phonetic element, and can be compared to Ԟ wàng ‘to forget’ with the 
same elements conﬁ  gured vertically. ऌ0ዴ! is composed of the element ᣹/⎛ ,  known as the 
‘food radical’, and the phonetic element ᆸ wo ˇ. ҽ includes two strokes ( dia ˇ n and tí) on the left, 
forming the so-called ‘ice radical’, found only in a few graphs such as Д bīng ‘ice’. The right 
element of ҽ is ΄ lìng, a phonetic element also found in ࿬ líng ‘zero’. The four strokes at 
the base of ེ/ሤ are a form of the ‘ﬁ  re radical’ which, in its independent form, is written ૜.
b. ADVs: The graph ੪ is composed of the radical ᢼ and the phonetic Ᾰ gèn (cf. ੬ hèn, ੫ 
he ˇ n, ৌ gēn). ვ is ࡍ dà ‘big’ with an extra dia ˇ n. The graph થ/ᔘ is also used for the word 
huán ‘to give back’, which probably accounts for the presence of ᨙ on the left, a radical associ-
ated with motion. The simpliﬁ  ed version substitutes ̙
 not for its sound or meaning, but for 
its general shape, which serves to represent the complicated right-hand element.
c. ˞should be distinguished from ̄ zı ˇ. In the traditional set, the radical assigned to ˞ is the 
second stroke, the vertical hook; but in the simpliﬁ  ed set, it is the ﬁ  rst stroke, whose uncon-
torted form is ˙, a radical also assigned to ˵.
8.11.1 Pronunciation practice
Cover the pinyin and check your pronunciation of the following phrases.
A. JIAˇNTIˇZÌ ‘SIMPLIFIED  SET’
ྯᏜ ஙᄖ ጐੑ ቷᅽ ᔦᄖ ᆸඣ
sānyuè jīntiāny e ˇ haˇo xìng Wáng zuótiānw o ˇ men
੪ಝ ݙऌ ݙੑ ීᄖ થੑ ቷඇ
he ˇn lèi bú è bù ha ˇ o míngtiān hái ha ˇo xìng Máo
ฝඣ ோᏜ औလ྇ ቷ೶ ීฤ ჉ඣ
nı ˇ men jiu ˇ yuè èrshí rì xìng Lín míngnián tāmen
ฝฒ Ⴧඣ ڭᏜ ੪ං ݙვಝ ದ൮
nı ˇ ne tāmen bāyuè he ˇ n máng bú tài lèi le ˇng ma
ݙದ ੪ེ ோလ ݙऌ೫ ੑݙੑ ದ೫
bù leˇ ng he ˇ n rè jiu ˇshí bú è le ha ˇo bu ha ˇol e ˇng le
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  8 421
B. FÁNTIˇZÌ (INCLUDING  GRAPHS  THAT  HAVE  ONLY  ONE FORM )
΁ޝࣇ ሤ ̙ҽ˞ ޝዴ ځѐ ԧࣇ
tāmen he ˇ n rè bù le ˇng le he ˇn è míngnián wo ˇ men
̙ሤ˞ ዴ̙ዴ ׹ؖ Ұࣇ ҽ๜ ვੑ
bú rè le è bu è xìng Zhōun ı ˇ men le ˇ ng ma tài ha ˇ o
8.11.2 Dialogue
ଡ: ஙᄖ੪ංጐ੪ಝă
ጰ: ᔦᄖฒǛ
ଡ: ᔦᄖથੑǈݙვංǈጐݙვಝă
ଡ: ฝඣऌݙऌǛ
ጰ: ݙऌǈથੑƽฝฒǛ
ଡ: ᆸฒǈᆸ੪ऌă
ଡ: ஙᄖ੪ེ!
ጰ: ᔦᄖጐ੪ེƽ
ଡ: ஙᄖದ೫ă
ጰ: ᔦᄖฒ?
ଡ: ᔦᄖݙვದǈથੑă
ଡ: ᆸඣ੪ེă
ጰ: ᆸጐ੪ེƽ੪ེጐ੪ಝƽ
ଡ: ᆸඣጐ੪ಝă
ଡ: ऌ൮Ǜ
ጰ: ݙვऌăᆸ੪ಝăฝฒǛ
ଡ: ݙಝǈથੑă
ጰ: ऌݙऌǛ
ଡ: ݙऌ೫ă
ጰ: ᆸጐݙऌă
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University422 THE CHARACTER  UNITS
8.12 Action verbs and associated function words
Ы! ฺ! ̏གྷ! ኝ! ঱
3 + 3 8 + 4 3 + 0 6 + 7 7 + 8 4 + 6
 भ!  ள! ల !
 3 + 4  3 + 5 2 + 8 
chī fàn yı ˇ jīng  kè bān
‘to eat’ ‘rice; food; meal’ ‘already’ ‘class; lesson’ ‘shift; class’
˯ ˭ ՟0඗ ѣ
1 + 2 1 + 2 3 + 4 1 + 5
shàng xià méi yo ˇ u
‘on; upper;  ‘under; lower;  NEG ‘to have’
to go up’ to go down’
NOTES
a. ߐ is a compound of ా ko ˇ u ‘mouth’ and the element ໨, independently pronounced qı ˇ . 
Hint: ‘resembles teeth and tongue, used to eat’. भ/ฺ is a compound of the ‘food radical’ 
(whose independent form is အ) and the phonetic न fa ˇ n. Hint: ‘customer on the left with a 
cap on, with food on the right behind a sneeze shield’. ల/ኝ! contains the ‘speech radical’ (֏ 
in its independent form) and ڍ guo ˇ ‘fruit’ as an imperfect phonetic element whose original 
phonetic connection to ల/ኝ! has weakened due to changes in pronunciation. Hint: ‘board on 
an easel in a classroom’.
b. Distinguish ̏ yı ˇ from ̎ jı ˇ, ̐ sì, and ˙ yı ˇ.
c. The right side of the traditional graph གྷ is said to derive from the drawing of a loom used 
to represent the root meaning of jīng, the ‘warp [of a loom]’. From the movements and result of weaving, the word derives meanings such as ‘to pass through’ or ‘to regulate’ as well as ‘classic texts’ [cf. English ‘text’ and ‘textile’]. The etymological meaning of the compound ̏གྷ is harder to see, but probably derives from a notion of ‘to complete the task’.
d. The traditional ՟ has the same number of strokes as ඗ in the simpliﬁ  ed set, so they are 
placed together above to save space. Both have the water radical on the left (three strokes, two 
dia ˇ n and a tí, in contrast to a dia ˇ n plus tí in ದ). In the simpliﬁ  ed graph, the right side of the tra-ditional character has been replaced by the independently occurring element Კ. ඗0
՟ is also 
used for the word mò ‘to submerge’, which probably explains the presence of the water radical.
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  8 423
8.12.1 Phrases
A. JIAˇNTIˇZÌ ‘SIMPLIFIED  SET’
ߐभ ߐ೫ થ඗ ඗ᎌ ฝฒ
chīfàn chī le hái méi méiyo ˇun ıˇ ne
࿟ల ጯள ᔓ೫ ሆۂ भ੪ੑ
shàngkè yı ˇ jīng zo ˇu le xiàbān fàn he ˇn hăo
඗ᎌ೫ ࿟ల ඗ల ීᄖ ੪ಝ
méiyo ˇ u le shàngkè méi kè míngtiānh e ˇn lèi
࿟ۂ થ඗ߐฒ ጯளߐ೫ ᔓ೫඗ᎌ થ඗
shàngbān hái méi chī ne yı ˇ jīng chī le zo ˇu le méiyo ˇu hái méi
B. FÁNTI ˇZÌ ‘TRADITIONAL  SET’
ሤ˞ ˯ኝ ᔘр Ыฺ ̏གྷ֕˞
rè le shàngkè hái ha ˇoc h īfàn yı ˇ jīng zo ˇu le
ځ͇՟ኝ ̙͉ዴ Ұࣇ ̙ዴ˞ ˭ኝ˞
míngtiān méi kè bú tài è nı ˇmen bú è le xiàkè le
8.12.2 Reading
A. JIAˇNTIˇZÌ
ଡ: ߐ೫൮ ?
ጰ: ߐ೫ăฝฒǛ
ଡ: થ඗ǈᆸݙऌă
ଡ: ߐ೫඗ᎌǛ
ጰ: થ඗ǈฝฒă
ଡ: ඗ᎌǈᆸݙऌă
ጰ: ᆸጐݙऌǈஙᄖვེ೫ă
ଡ: ฝߐभ೫൮Ǜ
ጰ: થ඗ăฝฒǛ
ଡ: ᆸጯளߐ೫ă
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University424 THE CHARACTER  UNITS
ଡ: ஙᄖੑݙੑǛ
ጰ: થੑă
ଡ: ߐभ೫൮Ǜ
ጰ: ߐ೫ăฝฒǛ
ଡ: ᆸጐጯளߐ೫ă
ଡ: Ⴧඣᔓ೫඗ᎌǛ
ጰ: ጯளᔓ೫ǈ࿟ల೫ă
ଡ: ๎ǈ࿟ల೫ă
ଡ: Ⴧߐ೫඗ᎌǛ
ጰ: ඗ᎌǈვං೫ă
ଡ: Ⴧݙऌ൮Ǜ
ጰ: ݙऌǈથੑă
ଡ: Ⴧඣጯள࿟ల೫൮ ?
ጰ: થ඗ǈჇඣથ඗ᎌߐभฒă
ଡ: ๎ǈ඗ߐभฒă
ጰ: ඗ᎌă
ଡ: ීᄖᎌ඗ᎌలǛ
ጰ: ඗ᎌǈීᄖလᏜጙ੓ăጙ੓඗లă
ଡ: औ੓ฒǛ
ጰ: औ੓ᎌǈྯ੓ጐᎌă
B. FÁNTIˇZÌ
ϥĈ ԧ̫͇ޝ௢Ċ
˙Ĉ Ыฺ˞๜ĉ
ϥĈ ᔘ՟׸Ă͉ѓ˞Ą
˙Ĉ ዴ๜ĉ
ϥĈ ޝዴĄҰ׸ĉ
˙Ĉ ԧ̙ዴĂ̏གྷЫ˞Ą
ϥĈ ՂϨ׸Ă΁̏གྷ˯ኝ˞๜ĉ
˙Ĉ ΁̫͇ޝѓĂ՟ѣ˯ኝĄ
ϥĈ Ұሤ๜ĉ
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale UniversityUNIT  8 425
˙Ĉ ሤĊĉ!ԧ̙ሤĂߑ͇ޝሤ̫͇р˞Ą
ϥĈ ߑ͇ޝሤĂ̫͇˵ޝሤĄ
˙Ĉ ̫͇ᔘрĂ̙ሤĄ
Fill in the blanks.
1. ᆸ___඗ߐभฒǈฝฒǛ!0!ᆸ___ளߐ೫ă
2. ஙᄖ੪ੑǈݙ___ጐݙದă 0!___ᄖጐ੪ੑă
3. ᔦᄖݙ___ದǈથੑă 0!ᔦᄖ੪ੑǈభဵஙᄖེ___ă
4. ᆸቷ೶ǈ჉___ቷ೶ă 0!ဵ൮Ǜฝඣቷ೶Ǜᆸጐ___೶ă
5. ᆸᔦᄖ੪ංǈஙᄖጐ੪___ă 0!ීᄖ___Ǜ
6. ߐ___೫඗ᎌǛ 0!ߐ___ă
NOTES
a. భဵ! ke ˇ shì ‘but’
b. ဵ shì ‘to be the case’
8.13 On the street #1
This section appears regularly in the lessons to introduce you to words and 
phrases commonly seen on signs, notices, shop fronts, and billboards across China (as well as in Chinese communities throughout the world).
ˢ˾! ΍˾! ܥͪ
rùko ˇu chūko ˇ u yu ˇ shuı ˇ
‘entrance’ ‘exit’ [on manhole covers](‘enter-opening’) (‘exit-opening’) (‘rain-water’)Exercise 5
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University426 THE CHARACTER  UNITS
!ѣࢨ̳Φ! ᅙҖ
  ፖቲ
 yo ˇuxiàn gōngsī yínháng
 ‘Co. Ltd.’ ‘bank’
 (‘have-limit company’) (‘silver-shop’)
NOTES
a. Left leaning ˢ has, in earlier notes, been contrasted with right leaning ˠ rén, as well as 
with balanced ˣ bā.
b. ࢨ and ᅙ/ፖ are part of a phonetic set based on ґ that includes ޝ he ˇ n ‘very’.
c. Җ writes two (historically related) words: háng, with a number of meanings including ‘shop; 
ﬁ rm; row’; and xíng ‘to go; to do; to be okay’ (as in થҖ).
Ideograms
Learning Chinese Sample
Copyright © 2011 Yale University